Exploring Airline Gate-Scheduling Optimization Using
Quantum Computers
Hamed Mohammadbagherpoor
NC State University, hmohamm2@ncsu.edu
Patrick Dreher
NC State University, padreher@ncsu.edu
Mohannad Ibrahim
NC State University, mmibrah2@ncsu.edu
Young-Hyun Oh
IBM Corporation, ohy@us.ibm.com
James Hall
NC State University, jlhall4@ncsu.edu
Richard E Stone
Delta Air Lines, richard.stone@delta.com
Mirela Stojkovic
Delta Air Lines, mirela.stojkovic@delta.com
This paper investigates the application of quantum computing technology to airline gate-scheduling
quadratic assignment problems (QAP). We explore the quantum computing hardware architecture and soft-
ware environment required for porting classical versions of these type of problems to quantum computers.
We discuss the variational quantum eigensolver and the inclusion of space-eﬃcient graph coloring to the
Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization (QUBO). These enhanced quantum computing algorithms
are tested with an 8 gate and 24 ﬂight test case using both the IBM quantum computing simulator and a
27 qubit superconducting transmon IBM quantum computing hardware platform.
Key words : Quadratic Unconstrained Optimization Problem, Gate-based Superconducting Quantum
Computer, Quantum Computing Algorithms, Airline Gate Scheduling
1. Introduction
One of the many complex problems facing the airline industry today is how to optimize
large combinations of cargo and passenger traﬃc among the planes, gates, personnel and the
air traﬃc ﬂows originating or terminating at an airport. Finding solutions to this complex
combinatorial optimization problem is important for airlines in order to be able to control
costs and minimize ineﬃciencies (Stollenwerk et al. (2019)).
1
arXiv:2111.09472v1  [quant-ph]  18 Nov 2021

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Mohammadbagherpoor, et.al.: Gate-Scheduling QAP Using Quantum Computers
2 Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing
A mathematical framework that can be used to compute optimal solutions for this type
of problem is known as the quadratic assignment problem (QAP). This is a diﬃcult combi-
national optimization problem of the NP-hard class (Sahni and Gonzalez (1976)).
A widely cited application of a QAP is the assignment of facilities to locations such that
each facility is assigned to only one location. Given that facility versus location assignment
costs are known, the problem is ﬁnding a minimum cost allocation of facilities to locations
taking the costs as a sum of all distance and ﬂow products. A constrained QAP is a nat-
ural framework for assigning ﬂights to gates under a variety of constraints and objectives.
Generally, such QAP type problems of size n> 30 cannot be solved optimally on digital
computers in reasonable time. For example, see (Loiola et al. (2007)), or (Gonçalves et al.
(2017)). Improvements through approximations, heuristics and special structures (Kim et al.
(2017)) can all be implemented in order to get reasonable solutions for some, but not all,
purposes and time frames. The question remains if one can do better than reasonable or do
more than some.
One expectation of a viable quantum computer is the capability to ﬁnd an optimal solution
to large quadratic assignment problems. Delta Air Lines has partnered with North Carolina
State University in an eﬀort to explore how quantum computing may be able to address such
types of ﬂight-gate scheduling optimizations. The goal will be to understand what are the
potential capabilities for a quantum computer to be able to optimally solve large quadratic
assignment problems that are so computationally prohibitive they could never be computed
using classical digital computers.
In Section 2 we present a combinatorial optimization model (CO) model that is a natural
QAP approach to gate scheduling. In Section 3 we describe the quantum computing hardware
architecture and software environment used when porting this type of model to a quantum
computer. In Section 4 we discuss the simulations and experimental results and analysis and
comparison between the digital and quantum computing methods. Finally in Section 5 there
is a discussion of conclusions that can be inferred from the work and a look toward future
steps for improving this algorithm as quantum computing hardware platforms become more
robust.
2. Digital Computing Implementation of Gate Scheduling Optimization
Algorithms
The natural base formulation of the gate-scheduling problem is a QAP where the decision
is which gate to assign to each plane. The objective is naturally quadratic with the major

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Mohammadbagherpoor, et.al.: Gate-Scheduling QAP Using Quantum Computers
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing 3
component being the interaction of pairs of planes. For this paper we will use the passenger
walking distance between gates given a predicted value of the number of passengers connect-
ing between planes. To model the plotting problem at a ﬁxed point in time the following
variables need to be speciﬁed.
• P = Set of planes to park at gates
• G = Set of gates at which to park planes
• vij = Expected number of passengers connecting between planespi and pj
• dkl = Walking distance between gatesgk and gl
• xik = 1 if planepi is parked at gategk, 0 otherwise
The challenge is to minimize the objective functionJ with respect to the constraints that
follow:
J =
∑
i,j∈P
∑
k,l∈G
xikxjlvijdkl (1)
such that
∑
k∈G
xik = 1 ∀ i∈P (2)
∑
i∈P
xik = 1 ∀ k∈G (3)
where xik∈{ 0, 1} ∀i∈P and∀ k∈G
Modiﬁcations to this initial generic formulation need to be made in order to arrive at a
speciﬁc useful model. As an example, we would want to replace the constraint Eq.(3) with
the following.
∑
i∈P
xik ≤ 1 ∀ k∈G (4)
The constraints in Eq.(2) and Eq.(4) mathematically state that a plane needs to be assigned
a gate, but a gate does not need to be assigned a plane.
This set of constraints should be modiﬁed further.
∑
i∈Pt
xik ≤ 1 ∀ k∈G and∀ t∈T (5)

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Mohammadbagherpoor, et.al.: Gate-Scheduling QAP Using Quantum Computers
4 Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing
Here, Pt is the set of planes requiring a gate at time t in the time period T under
consideration However, using all ofT would create redundant constraints. Fortunately, there
are eﬃcient ways to ﬁnd a subset ofT which eliminates the redundancy without weakening
this set of constraints.
There is a long list of modiﬁcations that should be considered for a useful model. Here is
a small sampling from this list.
• Gate Restrictions For various reasons, not every gate can accommodate every plane.
• Gate Closings Not all gates can be used all the time.
• Contentions Even if two particular planes can individually be assigned to two particular
gates, proximity may preclude both assignments being made at the same time.
• Alleyway Congestion Gates using the same alleyway should avoid planes departing
close in time.
• Adjacent Gates Gates close in proximity should avoid planes departing close in time.
Solving a realistic version of this gate plotting model for a large and busy airport would
be impractical by normal methods. An interesting aspect of quantum computing is that the
underlying QAP itself seems to be a more natural problem to solve. What one avoids in
classical computing is instead what one uses in quantum computing. Exploring the option for
utilizing a quantum computer to optimize these gate-scheduling problems may be a viable
path forward in the future.
3. Quantum Computing Implementation of Gate Scheduling Optimization
Algorithms
Calculating a complete solution of a plane-gate scheduling constrained QAP problem for a
very large and busy airport is impractical with digital computing technologies. A quantum
computer may have the potential to circumvent some of these diﬃculties.
Exploring the possibility of implementing a gate scheduling optimization algorithm for a
quantum computing system requires a re-design of the digital version. This includes both
developing a working understanding of both the quantum computing hardware architecture
and software environment so that the digital version of this QAP algorithm can be success-
fully re-structured and migrated to a quantum computing hardware system.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Mohammadbagherpoor, et.al.: Gate-Scheduling QAP Using Quantum Computers
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing 5
3.1. Quantum Computing Hardware Architectures
Quantum computers are based on a fundamentally diﬀerent premise for computation when
compared to a digital computer. The digital computer operates on the mathematics of a
base2 system, whereas the fundamental premise of computation for a quantum computer is
based on something called a qubit. Unlike a classical bit that only has two states (sometimes
designatedas"On"or"Oﬀ"or"0"or"1"),aquantumbit(qubit)canberepresentedbymany
diﬀerent weighted, linear combinations of "0" and "1". The rules for quantum computation
are based on the physics of quantum mechanics and concepts of superposition and quantum
entanglement rather than the electrical engineering design of digital logic circuits. (Nielsen
and Chuang (2009))
Planning computations on a quantum computer and verifying proper operation of the
algorithms running on the machine are also totally diﬀerent from digital computations.
Unlike digital computations where it is possible to query a system’s state at diﬀerent points
during the computation, it is impossible to observe the intermediate results for a quantum
computation without destroying the quantum state. A system cannot be disturbed with
any type of intermediate measurement until the completion of the calculation, otherwise the
entire computation on the quantum computer will automatically be terminated in whatever
stateitwasatwhenthemeasurementwasattempted.Thereisnopossibilityofre-startingthe
computation from the point where an intermediate measurement was taken and continuing
with that computation or of re-running a computation from the beginning in a deterministic
way. Upon completion of the computation, the idea of an "answer" also has a very diﬀerent
interpretation. Whereas a digital computer will give a deterministic answer, a quantum
computer will provide a histogram representing a spectrum of measurements with their
relative probabilities.
Today there are several diﬀerent types of quantum computing hardware architectures that
have been developed. These include an analog-based platform based on Quantum Annealing,
various superconducting transmon devices based on non-linear Josephson junction circuits,
and trapped ion devices. In this paper, the IBM superconducting, transmon-based quan-
tum computing hardware platforms were used for the computations. We selected theIBMQ
Toronto, which is a 27-qubit quantum computing processor.
Noise is an additional consideration when running on a quantum computing hardware plat-
form. Today’s quantum computers are best described as Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Mohammadbagherpoor, et.al.: Gate-Scheduling QAP Using Quantum Computers
6 Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing
Figure 1 IBM published information (IBM Quantum: (https://quantum-computing.ibm.com/) ) on the qubit layout
on the IBMQ_Toronto quantum computing hardware processor. The ﬁgure on the top is the actual con-
nectivity of the qubits. The ﬁgure on the bottom-left is a color coded "heat map" showing the individual 1
qubit error rates and on the bottom-right is the direct 2 qubit connection error rates on Toronto.
(NISQ) machines. Such types of noise present in these machines today adversely impacts
the stability of the quantum computations. Noise essentially destroys the coherence of the
quantum state and limits the size of the application that can be run on these machines.
Mitigation of this noise and development of error correction methodologies that will extend
the quantum computer’s computational capabilities are both active area of research. Fig. 1
shows the general architecture and qubit connectivity of the machine and a graphical "heat
map" showing the level of 1 qubit and 2 qubit errors for this processor.
A critical component in the overall planning for the quantum computation is choosing
the qubits for the computations on a quantum computing hardware architecture with the
best proﬁle for low error rates on that platform. Quantum computing programs that run
on today’s NISQ platforms carefully place the quantum codes for that algorithm on the
subset of qubits and connections with the best coherence and smallest error parameters in
order to deliver a better execution of the program. Some additional properties of the Toronto
processor and a brief discussion of error rates and their impact on quantum calculations are
presented in the Appendix.
3.2. Software Environments
3.2.1. Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE) Quantum computers have the poten-
tial to solve speciﬁc mathematically structured classes of problems exponentially faster than

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Mohammadbagherpoor, et.al.: Gate-Scheduling QAP Using Quantum Computers
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing 7
classical computers. However, developing the methodologies and software for achieving this
goal will take research and development eﬀort and may require new technologies to overcome
today’s NISQ computer limits. Because both the quantum hardware and software limitations
will continue to be limiting factors in the near future, researchers have been investigating
hybrid algorithms that can be run eﬃciently using a combination of both quantum and clas-
sical components. Eigenvalues, eigenvectors, and optimization problems play an important
role in the development of such hybrid algorithms.
Peruzzo et al. (2014) presented the Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE) algorithm as
an improved method for ﬁnding the quantum state corresponding to the minimum energy
of a Hamiltonian by applying a quantum/classical hybrid variational technique. In the VQE
approach the Hamiltonian matrixH can be derived by the interaction spins or electronic
systems in physical systems.H can be calculated to ﬁnd the eigenvectors|ψi(t)⟩ and the cor-
responding eigenvaluesλi of the Hamiltonian matrix by converting an optimization problem
to an adiabatic quantum computation. Using their technique, both classical and quantum
computers are used together to iterate on an algorithm to converge intermediate results
toward the correct solution.
The main goal of VQE is to ﬁnd the desired eigenvectors and eigenvalues by optimizing a
parameterized quantum program. The lowest eigenvalue is of primary interest in the VQE
approach since it is the optimum solution of the problem, same as the lowest energy is the
solution to a Hamiltonian in physical systems. VQE can be used to ﬁnd the solution for Eq.
(6),
E(θ) =m
θ
in⟨ψ(θ)|H|ψ(θ)⟩. (6)
Because|ψ(θ)⟩ is the normalized solution for Eq. (6), it can be the minimum eigenvalue of
H. H =∑
iβiHi where Hi are the tensor products of Pauli operators andβi are the real
coeﬃcients. By considering this reformulation forH matrix, Eq. (6) can be represented as,
E(θ) =m
θ
in⟨ψ(θ)|H|ψ(θ)⟩ =m
θ
in
∑
i
βi⟨ψ(θ)|Hi|ψ(θ)⟩. (7)
Finding the minimum eigenvalue can be an NP-hard problem as the size of the Hamil-
tonian matrix increases. To address this problem, diﬀerent quantum techniques have been
developed (Moll et al. (2018)). Quantum phase estimation (QPE) is one of the main tech-
niques that can be applied to a unitary quantum circuit derived from a problem to ﬁnd its

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Mohammadbagherpoor, et.al.: Gate-Scheduling QAP Using Quantum Computers
8 Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing
Figure 2 The schematic diagram of the variational quantum eigensolver (VQE) algorithm
minimum eigenvalue, that is the solution of the Eq. (6). However, practical resource con-
straints with today’s NISQ hardware limit the implementation of this algorithm. Hence, it
is not possible to ﬁnd a complete solution to this problem using near-term noisy quantum
computers.
Alternatively, researchers have been developing some hybrid classical-quantum algorithms
(e.g., VQE (Peruzzo et al. (2014)) and QAOA (Farhi et al. (2014), Wang and Abdullah
(2018), Guerreschi and Matsuura (2019))) to solve a problem by ﬁnding the minimum eigen-
value of the Hamiltonian MatrixH in a recursive optimization process using both NISQ
quantum computers and classical computers. Fig. 2 illustrates the components of the VQE
algorithm. In this hybrid system, all of the qubits in the quantum computer are initialized to
the zero state. A parameterized quantum program (i.e., state preparation) is applied to the
zero states and the expectation value of the corresponding Hamiltonian (⟨ψ(θ)|Hi|ψ(θ)⟩)
is calculated. A classical optimizer is used to update the parameters and ﬁnd an optimum
values for⃗θ through the classical optimization process (Farhi et al. (2014), Peruzzo et al.
(2014)). This process is repeated recursively until the hybrid system ﬁnds the minimum
eigenvalue of theH matrix (Wang et al. (2019)) or some optimization limit are reached. The
parameterized quantum circuit (U (θ)) is known as anAnsatz. Choosing an ansatz operator
as a variational form plays an important role in the optimization process. In most cases, an
ansatz should be able to eﬃciently run in quantum devices.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Mohammadbagherpoor, et.al.: Gate-Scheduling QAP Using Quantum Computers
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing 9
Diﬀerent classical optimizers can be used to solve the optimum values forθ. These tech-
niques perform various forms of gradient descent methods to apply iterative optimization
algorithms to solve the problem (Kandala et al. (2017), Romero et al. (2018)).
This paper considers two well-known classical optimizers.
• Theconstrainedoptimizationbylinearapproximation(COBYLA)algorithmisanumer-
ical optimization method that ﬁnds the min/max of the objective function without knowing
the gradient value (Gomez and Hennart (1994)).
• The simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation (SPSA) algorithm is used to
optimizeasystemwithmultipleunknownparameters.Thisalgorithmonlyusesthecostfunc-
tion measurements and is eﬃcient in high-dimensional optimization problems. The gradient
approximation using this technique requires only two measurements regardless of dimension
of the problem which makes this algorithm to be a powerful technique to optimize a problem
with multiple unknown parameters (Spall (1987)-Spall (1992)).
The implementation and results for each of the optimizers will be presented in section 4.
3.2.2. Binary Optimization Problem and Quantum HamiltonianCombinatorial opti-
mization (CO) is a major class of optimization problems that has various applications in
industry and research. In particular, CO for Graph Coloring has been extensively used in
diﬀerent application domains such as transportation management, social media, telecommu-
nication, and resource scheduling. Most of these applications are NP-hard problems that are
attractive but challenging for researchers to solve.
Three approaches can be considered to tackle CO: Exact Algorithms, Approximation Algo-
rithms, and Heuristic algorithms. (Halim and Ismail (2017), Festa (2014))
An exact algorithm, by deﬁnition, is one that is guaranteed to ﬁnd a solution, if one exists.
Therefore, unless P = NP, an exact algorithm cannot have worst-case polynomial running
time for an NP-hard problem. Thus, in practice, an exact algorithm can take too much time
to reach an optimal solution, though it might ﬁnd good solutions in reasonable time.
An approximation algorithm is an exact algorithm to an approximate version of the prob-
lem. For example, an approximation algorithm might ﬁnd the solution over a subset of the
set of feasible solutions, or use an approximate version of the objective function. Approxima-
tion algorithms are a trade oﬀ between speed and solution quality in the cases where known
exact algorithms are too slow. Ideally, an approximation algorithm has a guarantee of how

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Mohammadbagherpoor, et.al.: Gate-Scheduling QAP Using Quantum Computers
10 Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing
close it comes to optimal, e.g., the solution found will have an objective value at least 4/5
of the true maximum of the original problem.
A heuristic algorithm, whether it works on the original problem or an approximate version,
does not have a proven guarantee that it will ﬁnd a solution in ﬁnite time for the problem
on which it works. Heuristic algorithms are usually faster and often simpler than other
algorithms and, so, represent another trade oﬀ between speed and solution quality.
Recently, Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization (QUBO) has been introduced to
cover a large variety of CO problems (Hao et al. (2014), McGeoch (2014), Kadowaki and
Nishimori (1998), Bertels et al. (2020)). The QUBO technique can ﬁnd an optimal solution
for many types of NP-hard problems such as graph partitioning, graph coloring, scheduling
management, and register allocation.
A QUBO problem can be formulated by Eq. (8) as described in (Glover and Kochenberger
(2018)),
(8)
J =min {XTQX +gTX +c}
=
∑
i,j∈P
∑
k,l∈G
xikxjlvijdkl + P
∑
i
(
1−
∑
k
xik
)2
+ P
∑
(i,j)
∑
k
xikxjk
where Q is an×n matrix with real numbers,X is the state vector with element of{0, 1}n
and P is a positive and large number. The goal of Eq. (8) is to ﬁnd the minimum of the
objective function which is the minimum eigenvalue of the matrixH. Eq. (8) can also be
expressed by Eq. (9) as described in (Lucas (2014)),
∑
i,j
Wijxi(1−xj) +
∑
i
Wixi, (9)
where Wi are the linear weightsQii for i = 1, 2,...,n and Wij are the quadratic weightsQij
for i<j . Herexi is a binary variable that can take0 or 1 and as a resultx2
i =xi. In order
to transfer Eq. (9) into an Ising model, the following substitution can be used as
xi =Zi + 1
2 , (10)
wherexi∈{ 0, 1} andZi∈{− 1, 1} fori = 0,...,n . By applying the substitution the Hamilto-
nian matrix would be (Barahona et al. (1982), Istrail (2000)),
∑
i,j
Wij
4 (1−Zi)(1 +Zj) +
∑
i
Wi
2 (1−Zi)
=− 1
2
∑
i,j
WijZiZj +
∑
i
WiZi +c.
(11)

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Mohammadbagherpoor, et.al.: Gate-Scheduling QAP Using Quantum Computers
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing 11
This Hamiltonian matrix will be a form of tensor products of PauliZ operators. Note
that since theZ is a diagonal matrix, the Hamiltonian matrix should be diagonal so that it
can be used in a VQE optimization process. In order to solve thek-coloring problem using
the standard QUBO optimization technique,nk qubits are required. The required number
of qubits is the main constraint of the standard QUBO optimization approach. Serra et al.
(2021) has recently presented a quantum annealing (QA) technique to ﬁnd near optimal
solution for the QUBO optimization problems by preparing the ground state of the Ising
spin Hamiltonian. In this paper we have considered a diﬀerent type of quantum computer
which is a universal Gate-based superconducting quantum computer and has capability to
ﬁnd the optimum solution to the combinatorial optimization problem. In addition, in sec-
tion 3.3 a new algorithm is introduced which solves thek-coloring optimization problem
by applyingnlog (k) number of qubits which exponentially reduces the required number of
qubits compared to the standard QUBO technique.
3.3. Space-Eﬃcient Graph Coloring Quantum Computing algorithms
In section 3.2.1, we showed that the standard QUBO optimization algorithm requiresnk
number of qubits which increases exponentially with the problem size. Therefore, it is
infeasable to run a gate scheduling problem with a reasonable size on existing NISQ devices.
In this section, a new space-eﬃcient technique that maps ak-coloring problem to a lower
number of qubits is explained. The number of colors is encoded tom bits (total 2m colors)
and the goal is to assign a color labeled bym bitstrings to each vertex, (Tabi et al. (2021)-
Krawiec and Zimborás (2020)). As mentioned in the standard k-coloring approach, two
neighboring nodes should not have the same color, therefore in the space-eﬃcient technique
a cost function should evaluate to nonzero if the neighboring nodes have the same color code.
For a graph with adjacency matrixA, the graph coloring problem can be mapped to the
ground state of the following Hamiltonian Eq. (12).
H =
∑
i,j
Aij
∑
a∈{0,1}m
m∏
l=1
(1 + (−1)alZi,l)(1 + (−1)alZj,l) (12)
The ground state of thenlog (k)-qubit Hamiltonian matrix is the solution to the graph
coloring problem which corresponds to the proper bitstring assignment of the graph vertices.
If the number of colors is not a power of2, i.e. 2m−1<k< 2m, m number of bitstrings is
considered to map the colors, however, the bitstrings in which∑m
i=1 2k−ibi<k are allowed for

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Mohammadbagherpoor, et.al.: Gate-Scheduling QAP Using Quantum Computers
12 Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing
vertex coloring. This means that new penalty terms should be added to Eq. (12) to satisfy
this limitation. For example in casek = 3, two bitstrings{00, 01, 10, 11} should be considered
to label the colors. Since only three colors are required to be assigned to the vertices, a
term ∑n
i=1(1−Zi,1)(1−Zi,2) should be added to the Hamiltonian matrix to penalize the
non-allowed bitstring which is(b1,b 2) = (1, 1). By applying Eq. (12) and considering the new
penalty term, the corresponding Hamiltonian matrix will be,
H =
n∑
i,j=1
Aij(1−Zi,1)(1−Zi,2)(1−Zj,1)(1−Zj,2)
+ (1 +Zi,1)(1 +Zi,2)(1 +Zj,1)(1 +Zj,2)
+ (1 +Zi,1)(1−Zi,2)(1 +Zj,1)(1−Zj,2)
+ (1−Zi,1)(1 +Zi,2)(1−Zj,1)(1 +Zj,2)
‘ + (1−Zi,1)(1−Zi,2)
(13)
As seen in Eq. (13), the last term will be added since four colors has been considered for
a problem that only requires three colors. This penalty term helps remove one of the binary
coded colors from the list.
4. Simulation and Experimental Results
This section discusses the simulation and experimental results for both the standard QUBO
optimization technique and the space-eﬃcient coloring scheme. All quantum simulations and
computations on both IBM’s quantum simulator and quantum computing hardware plat-
forms were accessed through the NC State University Quantum Computing Hub connection
into the IBM Quantum Network.
The gate scheduling problem described in this paper was formulated and mapped as a
graph coloring problem and tested on both a quantum simulator and an actual quantum
computinghardwareplatform.Weshowbothsimulationandexperimentalresultsofapplying
both graph coloring implementations discussed in Sections 3.2.1 and 3.3 to ﬁnd an optimal
solution for an example gate allocation problem and compare the results by considering
diﬀerent criteria such as number of required qubits, run-time and circuit depth.
For our example test case, we consider a setup with eight gates and 24 ﬂights. Fig. 3 shows
the corresponding derived graph based on the ﬂights arrival and departure time interval. The
graph nodes correspond to the ﬂights and an edge between two nodes shows the time overlap

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Mohammadbagherpoor, et.al.: Gate-Scheduling QAP Using Quantum Computers
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing 13
Figure 3 The corresponding derived graph based on the ﬂights arrival and departure time interval.
between the two ﬂights. The goal here is to colorize the graph using quantum embedding
approaches to minimize the problem objective function. By considering Eq. (11) and Eq. (12)
and converting the graph coloring problem to the corresponding Hamiltonian matrices, the
problem was mapped onto the IBM Qiskit platform, (Qiskit (2021)) and used to solve for
the ground state of the Hamiltonian matrices.
A Noise-Aware Compilation method from Qiskit was used for the circuit compilation and
optimization. This method maps the circuit to match the hardware topology as discussed in
Section 3.1 and also does light-weight optimizations by collapsing adjacent gates as appropri-
ate. We notice a direct beneﬁt from the eﬃcient embedding in all aspects of the comparison.
As both circuits run the same ansatz architecture, we see that the eﬃcient embedding proves
advantageous, as it uses fewer qubits.
As discussed in the hardware architecture section (Section 3.1) eﬃcient embedding for
mapping the problem to qubits on the hardware platforms focuses on the minimization of
the usage of SWAP operations. Quantum algorithms formulated with fewer 2-qubit interac-
tions will require fewer SWAPS to implement them on quantum platform. A design change
requiring fewer 2-qubit operations results in a shorter circuit (program) depth with a more
eﬃcient embedding and hence a shorter run-time. As discussed in Section 3.3, the eﬃcient
embedding scheme requires fewer qubits. This shorter run-time allows larger gate-scheduling

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Mohammadbagherpoor, et.al.: Gate-Scheduling QAP Using Quantum Computers
14 Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing
problem sizes to be implemented on the quantum platform. Simulation results were obtained
using IBM’s Aer simulator. Experimental results were obtained by running the circuits on
IBM’s Toronto 27 qubit quantum computing hardware platform. Fig. 4 shows that the graph
was successfully colored by applying the quantum space eﬃcient embedding technique. As
it can be seen the quantum machine is able to ﬁnd the optimum solution for this problem.
We investigate diﬀerent classical optimizers, considering diﬀerent well-known methods such
as COBYLA and SPSA to optimize the parameters of the quantum circuits. The results has
been shown in Fig. 5. The optimizers have been evaluated under the same situation such
as type of variational quantum circuit, depth of quantum circuit. The simulation results
demonstrate that the optimizers converge to the correct value and are able to ﬁnd an optimal
solution for the ﬂight gate allocation problem. It can be seen that the COBYLA has faster
convergence rate compared to the SPSA algorithm. however, it was shown that the SPSA
algorithm has better performance on today’s NISQ machines to optimize the parameters of
quantum variational circuits.
Figure 4 Quantum simulation results for 24 ﬂights and eight gates. The graph successfully colored by the applying
the eﬃcient embedding technique.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Mohammadbagherpoor, et.al.: Gate-Scheduling QAP Using Quantum Computers
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing 15
Figure 5 Convergence of diﬀerent optimizers methods to update the parameters of quantum circuit.
Due to the required number of qubits and the software/hardware limitation, the previous
case study (24 ﬂights and 8 gates) cannot be solved by the standard graph coloring tech-
nique using today’s quantum technologies. In order to evaluate and compare the presented
quantum graph coloring techniques in terms of the number of qubits, program depth and
run-time, a case study of ﬂight gate scheduling problem with ﬁve ﬂights has been considered.
Both techniques were applied and the derived Hamiltonian matrices were run on the quan-
tum machine. Table 1 shows a comparison between the two implementations described in
sections 3.2.1 and 3.3 in terms of the number of qubits, run-time and circuit depth. As it can
be seen for the standard embedding, the required number of qubits exponentially increases as
the size of the problem increases. The eﬃcient embedding technique will reduce the number
of qubits exponentially and requires smaller program depth which results in lower run-time
on NISQ quantum machines to solve an optimization problem. Fig. 6 shows the measure-
ment probability of the possible solutions for this case study by running the corresponding
Hamiltonian, derived by eﬃcient embedding technique, on a noisy IBM quantum machine.
The SPSA optimizer was utilized to optimize the circuit parameters. As can be seen the cor-
rect solution has the highest probability among the other possibilities and IBM-Q machine
was capable of solving this optimization problems however, there is still challenges to tackle
the optimization problems with relevant practical dimension due to the hardware limitation
(noise), the required number of qubits and program depth.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Mohammadbagherpoor, et.al.: Gate-Scheduling QAP Using Quantum Computers
16 Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing
Table 1 Comparison between the standard QUBO and the eﬃcient embedding approaches
Standard Embedding Eﬃcient Embedding
# Qubits n×k: 25 n×log(k): 15
Circuit Depth 29 19
Run-time (sec) 5569.84 395.48
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Correct Solution 
Figure 6 Hardware results with the measurement probabilities for a bank with eight ﬂights and eight gates.
5. Conclusions and Next Steps
The experimental results reported here showed that smaller circuit size (program length)
allows for a more eﬃcient mapping to match the limitations of the hardware topology. As a
result we were able to map larger problem sets to the actual quantum hardware platforms.
This is a critical advancement in the usage of variational quantum algorithms solving such
optimization problems. Using quantum computers with the methodologies discussed here, it
is possible to utilize variational algorithms such as VQE to gate allocation problems with
large sizes in the near future.
This eﬀort is forward-looking in the sense that actionable solutions to solve these com-
plex gate-scheduling problems are currently beyond the capability of contemporary Noisy
Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) technology. However, over the past several years there
has been signiﬁcant advancements both in designing and manufacturing quantum hard-
ware processors with larger numbers of qubits and improved performance characteristics.
Advancements in error mitigation and error correction are also shaping the ability of appli-
cation developers to formulae more complex problems that can be implemented on quantum
computers.
The technology for building larger quantum computer hardware processors is developing
rapidly and possibly at some point in the next 5 to 10 years the computational capability
of a quantum computer will overtake the capabilities of largest digital computers that can

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Mohammadbagherpoor, et.al.: Gate-Scheduling QAP Using Quantum Computers
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing 17
be manufactured for solving these type of NP hard optimization problems. The results from
this basic research focused on developing and applying state-of-the-art quantum algorithms
and programming for constrained QAP problems on today’s quantum computing hardware
platforms will place Delta Air Lines in a "quantum ready" position to capitalize and exploit
quantum computing technology in the future as an alternative to today’s digital computa-
tional methods.
6. Author Contributions
HM, YO and MI wrote the python code and ran the simulations and quantum computations
on Toronto. RS and JH organized the test gate-scheduling database and wrote the introduc-
tion and classical optimization sections of the paper. PD, HM and MI wrote the quantum
optimization, results, conclusions and appendix sections. PD did the overall organization
and integration of the material in the paper and PD and MS did the ﬁnal editing of the
document.
Appendix. Superconducting Transmon Quantum Computing Architecture
In this section, we brieﬂy describe the architecture of theIBMQ Toronto, a 27-qubit IBM superconducting
transmon quantum computing hardware platform used in our experiments. Fig. 1 shows the general archi-
tecture and qubit connectivity of the machine and the color coding map that indicates the expected error for
each individual qubit and 2-qubit connection (CNOT error). A key aspect about IBM quantum hardware
is that each qubit and qubit connection has diﬀerent error rates. These rates, and other system parameters
such as qubit coherence times are not static and change with time. IBM performs periodic calibrations on
their quantum systems and the system properties update once this calibration sequence is complete. The
properties play a critical role in quantum circuit execution, as they are usually utilized in compiling and
optimizing the quantum program.
The IBM machines are accessed via a cloud portal where users can write quantum computing programs in
python using jupyter notebooks. A jupyter notebook can then be submitted either to a quantum computing
simulator or one of several diﬀerent hardware backends onto the actual quantum computing hardware plat-
forms. The daily measured and published error rates are important factors and considerations when loading
programs (circuits) representing quantum algorithms onto a quantum computing hardware platform.
Programs loaded onto a quantum computer require that each computation in the program be executed on
adjacent qubits. The actual physical layout of the qubits shows that there is limited connectivity between
each qubit. For large programs it is not possible to place each computation on the qubits so that they are
adjacent throughout the execution of the entire program. This limited connectivity of the qubits on the
machine requires that the information for the calculation that is contained on distant qubits must to be
moved until the two qubits are adjacent. This is called aSWAP operation. This has a major implication

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Mohammadbagherpoor, et.al.: Gate-Scheduling QAP Using Quantum Computers
18 Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing
on a quantum program’s length that can be executed on a quantum computer before the machine loses its
quantum mechanical wavefunction coherence depth in time and stops functioning. A key goal of compiling a
quantum program is to adequately map it to the subset of qubits and connections with the best coherence,
error parameters and a connectivity that guarantees the minimum amount of extra computation (SWAP
gates) so that it results in the best and longest execution of the program.
References
Barahona F, et al. (1982) On the computational complexity of ising spin glass models.Journal of Physics
A: Mathematical and General15(10).
Bertels K, Sarkar A, Hubregtsen T, Serrao M, Mouedenne AA, Yadav A, Krol A, Ashraf I (2020) Quantum
computer architecture: Towards full-stack quantum accelerators.2020 Design, Automation & Test in
Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE)(IEEE), URL http://dx.doi.org/10.23919/date48585.
2020.9116502.
Farhi E, et al. (2014) A quantum approximate optimization algorithm. Preprint at
https://arxiv.org/abs/1411.4028 .
Festa P (2014) A brief introduction to exact, approximation, and heuristic algorithms for solving hard com-
binatorial optimization problems.2014 16th International Conference on Transparent Optical Networks
(ICTON) (IEEE), URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/icton.2014.6876285.
Glover F, Kochenberger G (2018) A tutorial on formulating qubo models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1811.11538463 .
Gomez S, Hennart JP (1994) A direct search optimization method that models the objective and
constraint functions by linear interpolation. in [Advances in Optimization and Numerical Analy-
sis],SpringerNetherlands 51–67.
Gonçalves AD, Pessoa AA, Bentes C, Farias R, de A Drummond LM (2017) A graphics processing unit
algorithm to solve the quadratic assignment problem using level-2 reformulation-linearization tech-
nique. INFORMS Journal on Computing 29(4):676–687, URLhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.
2017.0754.
Guerreschi GG, Matsuura AY (2019) QAOA for max-cut requires hundreds of qubits for quantum speed-up.
Scientiﬁc Reports9(1), URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-43176-9.
Halim AH, Ismail I (2017) Combinatorial optimization: Comparison of heuristic algorithms in travelling
salesman problem. Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering26(2):367–380, URLhttp://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11831-017-9247-y.
Hao G, et al. (2014) The unconstrained binary quadratic programming problem: A survey, kochenberger.
Journal of Combinatorial Optimization28(1):58–81.
Istrail S (2000) Statistical mechanics, three-dimensionality and NP-completeness.Proceedings of the thirty-
second annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing - STOC'00 (ACM Press), URLhttp://dx.
doi.org/10.1145/335305.335316.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Mohammadbagherpoor, et.al.: Gate-Scheduling QAP Using Quantum Computers
Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing 19
Kadowaki T, Nishimori H (1998) Quantum annealing in the transverse ising model.Physical Review E
58(5):5355–5363, URLhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1103/physreve.58.5355.
Kandala A, et al. (2017) Hardware-eﬃcient variational quantum eigensolver for small molecules and quantum
magnets. Nature 549:242–246.
Kim SH, Feron E, Clarke JP, Marzuoli A, Delahaye D (2017) Airport gate scheduling for passengers, aircraft,
and operations.Journal of Air Transportation25(4):109–114, URLhttp://dx.doi.org/10.2514/1.
d0079.
Krawiec AGA, Zimborás Z (2020) Space-eﬃcient binary optimization for variational computing.preprint
arXiv URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.07309.
Loiola EM, de Abreu NMM, Boaventura-Netto PO, Hahn P, Querido T (2007) A survey for the quadratic
assignment problem.European Journal of Operational Research176(2):657–690, URLhttp://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.ejor.2005.09.032.
Lucas A (2014) Ising formulations of many np problems.Frontiers in Physics2:5.
McGeoch CC (2014) Adiabatic quantum computation and quantum annealing: Theory and prac-
tice. Synthesis Lectures on Quantum Computing 5(2):1–93, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.2200/
s00585ed1v01y201407qmc008.
Moll N, et al. (2018) Quantum optimization using variational algorithms on near-term quantum devices.
Quantum Science and Technology3(3):030503.
Nielsen MA, Chuang IL (2009)Quantum Computation and Quantum Information(Cambridge University
Press), URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511976667.
Peruzzo A, McClean J, Shadbolt P, Yung MH, Zhou XQ, Love PJ, Aspuru-Guzik A, O’Brien JL (2014)
A variational eigenvalue solver on a photonic quantum processor.Nature Communications5(1), URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ncomms5213.
Qiskit (2021) Open-source quantum development. URLhttps://www.qiskit.org/.
RomeroJ,etal.(2018)Strategiesforquantumcomputingmolecularenergiesusingtheunitarycoupledcluster
ansatz. Quantum Science and Technology4:14008, URL http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.
1088/2058-9565/aad3e4.
Sahni S, Gonzalez T (1976) P-complete approximation problems.Journal of the ACM23(3):555–565, URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/321958.321975.
Serra T, Huang T, Raghunathan AU, Bergman D (2021) Template-based minor embedding for adiabatic
quantum optimization.INFORMS Journal on ComputingURL http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.
2021.1065.
Spall J (1992) Multivariate stochastic approximation using a simultaneous perturbation gradient approxima-
tion. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control37(3):332–341, URLhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1109/9.
119632.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Mohammadbagherpoor, et.al.: Gate-Scheduling QAP Using Quantum Computers
20 Article submitted to INFORMS Journal on Computing
Spall JC (1987) A stochastic approximation technique for generating maximum likelihood parameter esti-
mates. 1987 American Control Conference, 1161–1167, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.23919/ACC.
1987.4789489.
Stollenwerk T, Lobe E, Jung M (2019) Flight gate assignment with a quantum annealer.Quantum Technology
and Optimization Problems, 99–110 (Springer International Publishing), URLhttp://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-030-14082-3_9.
Tabi Z, et al. (2021) Quantum optimization for the graph coloring problem with space-eﬃcient embedding.
arXiv:2009.07314 .
Wang D, et al. (2019) Accelerated variational quantum eigensolver.Phys. Rev. Lett.122:140504.
Wang Q, Abdullah T (2018) An introduction to quantum optimization approxima-
tion algorithm. The University of Maryland , URL https://www.semanticscholar.
org/paper/An-Introduction-to-Quantum-Optimization-Algorithm-Wang-Abdullah/
32f82d9d4e496d80e4cdc994073c8ddd4e680256.