1
Quantum Algorithms applied to
Satellite Mission Planning for Earth Observation
Serge Rainjonneau†, Igor Tokarev∗, Sergei Iudin∗, Saaketh Rayaprolu∗, Karan Pinto∗, Daria Lemtiuzhnikova∗,
Miras Koblan∗, Egor Barashov∗, Mohammad Kordzanganeh∗, Markus Pflitsch∗, and Alexey Melnikov∗§
† Thales Alenia Space, 31100 Toulouse, France
∗ Terra Quantum AG, 9000 St. Gallen, Switzerland
Abstract—Earth imaging satellites are a crucial part of our
everyday lives that enable global tracking of industrial activities.
Use cases span many applications, from weather forecasting to
digital maps, carbon footprint tracking, and vegetation mon-
itoring. However, there are limitations; satellites are difficult
to manufacture, expensive to maintain, and tricky to launch
into orbit. Therefore, satellites must be employed efficiently.
This poses a challenge known as the satellite mission planning
problem, which could be computationally prohibitive to solve
on large scales. However, close-to-optimal algorithms, such as
greedy reinforcement learning and optimization algorithms, can
often provide satisfactory resolutions. This paper introduces a set
of quantum algorithms to solve the mission planning problem
and demonstrate an advantage over the classical algorithms
implemented thus far. The problem is formulated as maximizing
the number of high-priority tasks completed on real datasets
containing thousands of tasks and multiple satellites. This work
demonstrates that through solution-chaining and clustering, op-
timization and machine learning algorithms offer the greatest
potential for optimal solutions. This paper notably illustrates that
a hybridized quantum-enhanced reinforcement learning agent
can achieve a completion percentage of 98.5% over high-priority
tasks, significantly improving over the baseline greedy methods
with a completion rate of 75.8%. The results presented in this
work pave the way to quantum-enabled solutions in the space
industry and, more generally, future mission planning problems
across industries.
Index Terms—Quantum algorithms, Earth observation, quan-
tum reinforcement learning, satellite mission planning, quantum
optimization
I. I NTRODUCTION
The reliable functioning of Earth-orbiting satellites crucially
affects our everyday services such as connectivity [1], nav-
igation [2], and media [3]. Most satellites receive dynamic
instructions on executing their mission in orbit, and planning
the exact sequence of tasks is critical to the efficiency and
sustainability of the project [4]. Algorithmic optimization
solutions have been suggested [5]–[7] as a remedy to the
§Corresponding author, e-mail: ame@terraquantum.swiss
Please check the published version, which includes all the latest
additions and corrections: IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl. Earth Obs. Remote
Sens. 16:7062-7075, 2023, DOI: 10.1109/JSTARS.2023.3287154
© © 2023 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission
from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future
media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising
or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or
redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component
of this work in other works.
planning problem. With the rise of quantum technologies, there
is a need to explore how quantum computing can improve the
time complexity or the quality of these solutions. This work
focuses on planning the mission of Earth-orbiting imaging
satellites using quantum machine learning [8]–[10] and op-
timization. Specifically, it explores using near-term quantum
technologies to improve the solution’s effectiveness today.
Similar approaches, such as the contribution of Ref. [11],
suggested an algorithm to overcome the scheduling task using
quantum annealers. Ref. [12] reviewed the literature and found
that although innovative developments existed, none revealed
any practical advantage over classical approaches. The current
work explores the interplay between classical and gate-based
quantum computing algorithms. The practical advantage of
employing this hybrid approach was shown in our earlier
contributions [13]–[15].
In general, space mission planning can be a computationally
hard problem [4] to solve; in large-scale missions, the size of
the problem requires a prohibitive amount of computational
resources. Finding an efficient plan requires the optimization
of movement and the re-ordering of tasks to maximize the
number of total completed tasks. In this work, each task is a
request made to the satellite to capture an image of the surface
of the Earth, and the aim is to maximize the number of images
taken, given a list of all requests and a total available time. In
this work, the imaging satellites orbit the Earth exactly on the
Earth’s terminator, which is the line separating Earth’s sun-
lit areas from the dark ones. In 24 hours, the satellite orbits
approximately 15 times around the Earth, which leads to 15
orbits shown schematically in Fig. 3(a). To capture the image,
the satellite must continuously aim the camera at the target
area for a time known as the acquisition slot. Each requested
image has an allocated data-take opportunity (DTO) window.
The satellite must point in the appropriate direction within
this window for the entire acquisition period to accomplish
a request. To aim at an area on Earth, the satellite needs to
rotate its camera to point in the desired direction. The latter
movement introduces a time delay that, when added to the
acquisition time, could limit the overall agility of the satellite
in covering multiple areas. The efficient satellite mission plan
will be able to choose the order of the acquisition requests to
maximize the number of completed requests.
This paper discusses the benefits of the optimization and
reinforcement learning algorithms over a greedy baseline al-
gorithm, the unique advantage offered by the potential of quan-
arXiv:2302.07181v2  [quant-ph]  7 Aug 2023

=== PAGE BREAK ===

2
tum computing, and a demonstration of how quantum methods
can be applied to improve machine learning and optimization
models. Specifically, the novel quantum reinforcement learn-
ing approach shown in Sec. III-D4 offers a completion rate of
98.5% on highest-priority requests in a multi-satellite system.
The model hybridizes the AlphaZero approach in Ref. [16]
and is trained on the QMware quantum cloud [17]. Sec. II
introduces the practical problem setup in more detail, including
the details on the data formatting in Sec. II-A, re-ordering
the requests in Sec. II-B, relaying algorithm in Sec. II-C,
and on solution chaining in Sec. II-D. Sec. III offers three
algorithms and their respective results: Sec. III-B establishes a
baseline greedy algorithm, and Sec. III-C and III-D discuss the
optimization and reinforcement learning algorithms. Finally,
Sec. IV summarises the results.
II. S ATELLITE MISSION PLANNING
Each satellite’s orbit is constrained to the Earth’s terminator.
Each satellite can only rotate at a maximum of one degree per
second to orient itself appropriately to capture images within
the acquisition window. Furthermore, the DTO duration for
each area to be captured is defined by the arc ranging within
45◦ (referred to as the depointing angle) from the apex point,
which is the point directly above the center of the request
on Earth. As a result of the width of these arcs, multiple
requests can have substantial overlap in their acquisition
windows. Furthermore, while coordinates for image requests
are provided in latitude and longitude, the satellite coordinates
support an Earth-centric inertial (ECI) format, providing more
spatial location support. Finally, two datasets are tested in this
work, including a single-satellite set containing 462 requests
and a two-satellite system with 2000 requests. The main results
of this work focus on the performance of various algorithms
on the latter dataset and only for the requests with the highest
priority.
A. Data Formatting
Two information sets were used in the preparation of this
paper:
• information about the satellite motion, including:
– the orbit number,
– time stamp, and
– satellite position and velocity in Cartesian ECI coor-
dinates; and
• information about acquisition request, including:
– request ID,
– request priority ranging from 1 to 4, where 4 denotes
the lowest priority,
– start and end times of the DTO window of the
request,
– the coordinates of the start and end of the median
line,
– satellite ID, and
– Boolean values indicating the progress of the acqui-
sition.
Fig. 1 demonstrates the satellite movements during acqui-
sition and the data that must be tracked during the capture,
Area of 
interest
Sub-satellite
point
Sub-satellite
point
Sub-satellite
point
Earth horizon
DTO duration
Satellite
orbit
Satellite
orbit
Acquisitionslot
«Max backward
depointing» point
«Null-pitch»
point
«Max forward
depointing»
point
Fig. 1. The trajectory of a satellite orbiting on the Earth’s terminator and
across a DTO window. At the first and third positions on the orbital line, the
satellite is at the ends of the request’s DTO window, as its depointing angle
is maximized at 45 ◦. At its second position, it is at the apex point, directly
above the request location.
such as the acquisition angles, the points at which the DTO
begins and ends, and the median coordinates.
B. Request Priority Ordering
Considering the priority associated with each request, it is
possible to express this objective as maximizing the completed
requests in the order of priority; the highest priority requests
are considered first, and only the lower priority requests are
considered upon completion. The exact quantification com-
pares the number of higher-priority requests accomplished. It
moves on to the next priority in case of equality, but this work
judges the algorithms by their completion rate performance
purely on the high-priority π1 request.
C. Relaying Algorithm
The satellite must rotate according to the relaying algorithm
to move from one request to another. To compute this rotation,
two points of interest are the final median points of the first
request and the initial median point of the second request.
These points, respectively, signify the time at which the first
request was completed and the time at which the next request
will begin. For a given transition, the relaying algorithm
operates in two steps: 1) it computes the relative positions
of each median point for the satellite, and 2) calculates in
degrees the angle between these vectors. Assuming that the
satellite rotates at a constant speed of one degree every second
and that the Earth is a perfect sphere, the resultant angle can
be approximated as the total relaying time in seconds.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
... ...
999
1000
Time1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
...
999
1000
Time 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
... ...
999
1000
Time
...
Problem formulation Potential solution Solution verification
Fig. 2. (a) Visualization of DTO windows (horizontal bars) over a horizontal axis of time and a vertical axis indicating request index. (b) Visualization of
solutions (green rectangles). (c) The chaining of requests based on their DTO windows and completion windows. As is evident, chaining provides a roadmap
to connect all completed requests and map out the order of requests.
D. Solution Chaining
Solution chaining considers the DTO windows, overlaps,
and the windows’ length compared to an acquisition time
estimate. DTO windows and possible solutions within those
windows are then visualized over an axis of time - see Fig. 2b.
The most efficient preliminary method for this setting is to sort
the requests by the start of their DTO windows and map the
acquisitions.
Next, the individual requests chained: the intermittent time
between captures is calculated using the relaying algorithm, af-
ter which the algorithm ensures sufficient time for the relaying
movement between the completion of each pair of consecutive
requests, ensuring that a sequence of requests can be executed
in the provided time. Chaining enables the suggested solutions
within the DTO windows of each request, which are otherwise
independently scattered, to be connected together into one
comprehensive solution for satellite movement. Shown in
Fig. 2(c) is a visualization of the chaining process between
multiple requests over time.
III. R ESULTS : QUANTUM ALGORITHMS FOR SATELLITE
MISSION PLANNING
The table below summarises the algorithms considered in
this work and their corresponding sections.
Clustering   III.A
Greedy algorithm   III.B
Optimization   III.C
Reinforcement learning   III.D
A. Clustering for Pre-processing
To deal with increasing complexity in problems is to reduce
the size of the dataset and deal with fewer parameters or
data points at once. Therefore, clustering is useful to stratify
the data by similarities and shorten the calculations necessary
for the overall program. The simplest method to cluster the
dataset is sorting the samples based on a single feature
of the data, a method known as bunching. The bunching
algorithms are explained in App. A, but this section focuses
on unsupervised-learning clustering methods such as the K-
means algorithm [18], [19].
This algorithm is a well-known clustering algorithm, and
its usage of physical distances in creating clusters makes it
a natural fit for the Space Mission Planning problem. This
algorithm is iterative, meaning it runs multiple iterations of the
same steps and finally converges at a solution. The first step of
this algorithm is the assignment stage; once k random points
are initialized to represent the k cluster centroids, each point
in the dataset is assigned to the closest centroid. Once this is
complete, the values of all points assigned to each centroid
kn are averaged, and the value of kn is updated to the newly
obtained mean value. Once these two steps are completed,
they are repeated until the centroids no longer shift between
two iterations (generally to an error threshold), which is when
the final clustering for the dataset is attained. The K-means
algorithm clustered the dataset based on all the features of
the requests: the DTO start and end times and the coordinates
of the start and end of the median line. This ensured that
clusters bunch the requests based on their DTO windows and
geographical locations. The latter is crucial in efficiently using
the relaying algorithm, as the geographically-close requests are
simpler to inter-navigate.
B. Greedy algorithm
The classical greedy algorithm is used to provide a reference
solution. First, the orbital and request data are separated by
satellite, and then the requests are clustered. In each cluster,
the algorithm begins at the satellite’s given start time and
increments by one second until it enters the DTO window of
the first request. Once the time stamp enters a DTO window,
the algorithm checks for enough time to complete a request. If
so, it completes the request, increments the time by the sum of
the relaying time and the acquisition time, adds the request ID
to a list of completed IDs and moves on to the next request.
The algorithm chooses the highest priority request if multiple
requests are available at a timestamp. If insufficient time to
complete a request, it simply moves on to the next request
and repeats the process. Once the final request is completed,
or the timestamp exceeds the final DTO window, the algorithm
outputs the percentage of completed requests of each priority.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

4
Fig. 3. (a) Schematic view of 15 satellite orbits performed within approximately 24 hours. (b) The results of the greedy algorithm are shown on the map.
The task contains 2000 requests that are planned for acquisition using 2 satellites. Green points correspond to completed requests, whereas blue points are
missed requests. (Inset) Progression of completed compared to missed requests.
TABLE I
RESULTS FOR THE GREEDY ALGORITHM BY PRIORITY , RUN OVER TWO
SEPARATE DATASETS .
Priority 1sat/462req 2sat/2000req
π1 99.2% 75.8%
π2 88.6% 36.1%
π3 80.7% 19.2%
π4 74.0% 18.2%
TABLE II
RESULTS OF THE GREEDY ALGORITHM USING CLASSICAL K-M EANS
CLUSTERING .
KMeans + Greedy
Priority 1sat/462 2sat/2000req
π1 99.1% 63.6%
An important limitation of the greedy algorithm is its
bandwidth for anticipation, but it provides a baseline for com-
parison. Its simplicity allows it to run faster than other models,
making it a good benchmark for data preprocessing. The
results in Fig. 3(b) and Tab. I show the greedy algorithm strug-
gles as the complexity of the input data increases. Therefore,
to solve this problem, algorithms that can handle high levels of
complexity without compromising accuracy are required. The
results of the greedy algorithm serve as the baseline algorithm
in this work. As evident in Tab. I, the greedy algorithm solves
the 1sat/462req dataset well but struggles on the 2sat/2000req
dataset. Thus, the latter was chosen as the comparison dataset
as it allowed more possibilities for improvement. Furthermore,
it should be noted that only the top priority π1 requests were
taken as the baseline, so the models’ accuracy performance
will be compared with the baseline π1 2sat/2000req of 75.8%.
C. Optimization Methods
As discussed earlier, one potential way to improve the
runtime of an algorithm was to break the data into smaller
clusters to reduce the necessary processing power. However,
attempting to build a fundamentally more powerful algorithm,
such as an optimization model, could be more fruitful. Op-
timization problems involve information and formulations,
including graphs, movement patterns and permutations, and
multiple viable solutions, out of which one ideal solution
must be determined by the metrics and constraints of the
problem. As such, optimization methods are well suited for
mission planning problems akin to the one at hand, which
aims to map out the best possible course of action for
a system of satellites seeking to maximize the number of
completed requests. Optimization, however, is expensive in
terms of time and computation; consequently, the potential of
harnessing the quantum advantage for optimization problems
could be especially valuable in discovering and delivering a
large speedup for mission planning problems.
Some research for optimization for space mission planning
currently exists. For instance, in Ref. [20], the problem of
Earth observation from a satellite (EOS) is investigated, fo-
cusing on obtaining images of certain areas of the Earth’s
surface related to customer requests. An optimization approach
for EOS’s daily photo selection (DPSP) is proposed. DPSP
is related to operational management and planning processes,
where each photo the client orders brings profit. Still, not all
requests can be satisfied due to physical and technological
limitations. The objective is, therefore, to select a subset of
queries for which the profit is maximized, and the proposed
algorithm is based on the metaheuristic ant colony optimiza-
tion algorithm (ACO). Examples based on real data are used as
reference problems. The calculations show that the proposed
algorithm can generate competitive and promising solutions.
The most well-known quantum-friendly optimization
method is the quadratic unconstrained binary optimization
(QUBO) model, which encapsulates the set of all optimization
problems with the following attributes:
• all variables are treated as binary objects
• constraints, while not necessarily absolute, are enforced
accordingly by use of the reward function
This work explores the QUBO-adaptable formulation
known as the integer optimization model for the space mission
planning problem. This solution has benefits and drawbacks
but can serve as a viable solution to the satellite optimization
problem.
The integer optimization model is conceptualized by en-
coding the desirable outcome of the solution in the cost

=== PAGE BREAK ===

5
Satellite maneuvers Data take opportunities for requests Acquisitions
Optimization solution for cluster 1 Optimization solution for cluster 2
 Optimization solution for cluster 
Fig. 4. Chaining results of classical integer optimization algorithm within clusters of data points.
function, which should be maximized or minimized on the
lattice of integer points of the special feasible subset in the
multidimensional space. This feasible subspace is defined
by adding the constraints of the satellite mission planning
problem. One of the most powerful approaches to that problem
is the branch and cut algorithm [21], used in solvers. In
addition, the following functions are incorporated to streamline
the calculations for the algorithm to stay within the constraints.
Incorporating these functions is crucial to developing viable
solutions as these functions, built over the Orekit space flight
dynamics library [22], are the key to accurate space mission
planning.
• Attitude Pointing: given the satellite, timestamp, and a
pair of longitude and latitude coordinates, this function
returns the attitude (roll, pitch, and yaw) angles of the
satellite when it is pointed towards the provided coordi-
nates.
• Acquisition Duration: given the starting and ending me-
dian coordinates of any request, this function returns the
amount of time, in milliseconds, that the satellite would
take to acquire the image.
• Maneuver Duration: given the beginning and ending
attitude angles (roll, pitch, and yaw), this function returns
the amount of time necessary for the satellite to complete
the maneuver from one attitude to the other.
• Read Ephemeris: given a JSON file and a satellite
ID, this function returns the satellite orbital information
(directional speed, directional position, timestamps, etc.)
in the form of an Orekit Ephemeris object, which is then
used to perform calculations for other functions using the
Orekit library.
Upon incorporating the above functions, revision of the con-
straints on this integer-based model, and modification of the
clustering algorithm to generate a greater number of smaller
clusters, the algorithm’s runtime was maintained despite the
significant increase in complexity. Given a set of requests, the
variables central to this model include the priority of each
request, the acquisition duration of each request, the start and
the end of the DTO windows, and the location of the median
points of the requests. From this, the algorithm calculates for
each reasonable pair of the requests inside the small cluster
all possible start times for the 1st request in a way that allows
the relaying maneuver to the 2d request. This is achieved
through simple iteration, using the Orekit functions described
above: an initial value for the relaying maneuver duration is
set to one second. Then, the maneuver start and end angles
are calculated with the attitude pointing function. Afterwards,
suppose the rotation time between the obtained angles via the
maneuver duration function is not equal to or greater than one
second, and the DTO limitations are not violated. In that case,
meaning the relaying time is equal to one second. Otherwise,
the duration is increased by one second, and this procedure is
repeated until either the duration is appropriate or the DTO is
violated. The result of these computations, tmin, is treated as
the minimum relaying maneuver time.
Given a set of requests f∈ F, the priority of each request
is denoted as πf , and the acquisition duration as τf . The
start of the DTO window (release time) for request f is
represented as rf and the deadline of the DTO window is
represented as df . In addition, Q⊂ N indicates the order of
accepted requests. As a result, index q∈ Q ={0,...,Q − 1}
demonstrates the position in the queue of requests in which
request f is accepted. The discretized rotation of the satellite
at the inception of the acquisition of request f is indicated by
αstart
f ∈ Astart
f . Similarly,αend
f ∈ Aend
f is the discretized rotation
of the satellite after the acquisition of the request. However,
all possible inceptions bfα for requests can be streamlined in
order of increasing time. Note thatbfα is the set of all possible
points in time at which it is possible to complete thef1 request
and then move to the f2 request. That is, it is at a time greater
than rf . Thus all the possible angles will correspond to these
moments. The set of possible pairs is defined as L, such that
the maneuver f1→f2 is possible; i.e.:
∃bf1αf1
,bf2αf2
:bf1αf1
+tmin(bf1αf1
+τf1,f 1,f 2)+τf1 =bf2αf2
,
(1)
wheretmin(t,f 1,f 2) is the minimum amount of time required
for a satellite to rotate from its position at the end of f1 at
the moment t to the starting point of f2. For all (f1,f 2)∈ L,
the sets Bstart
f1f2 ⊆ Aend
f1 and Bend
f1f2 ⊆ Astart
f2 and mapping
Mf1,f2 : Bstart
f1f2 → Bend
f1f2 are defined such that Mf1,f2(α1) =
α2, if bf1α1 +tmin(bf1α1 +τf1,f 1,f 2) +τf1 =bf2α2.
The binary variable xfq is introduced such that:
xfq =
(
1, if f-th request is started in the q-th slot,
0, otherwise. (2)

=== PAGE BREAK ===

6
In addition, the variable yfα is also introduced, where:
yfα =
(
1, if angle α is the start angle for request f,
0, otherwise. (3)
Finally, the indicator variable κf1f2 shows if requests were
completed successively one after another:
κf1f2 =
(
1, if f2-th follows right after the f1-th,
0, else. (4)
The cost function is defined as:
X
f∈F

X
q∈Q
Jfxfq−
X
α∈Astart
f
γfαyfα

→ max, (5)
where Jf is the weight of request f, and γfα is a coefficient
needed for penalizing time consuming solutions. Jf = 1 was
selected for the lowest priority requests in each cluster. For
the higher priority requests, the weight is greater than the
sum of all lower priority requests’ weights by one since each
higher priority request is valued more than any amount of
lower priority requests. The coefficients γfα range from 0 to
1
Q for the following definition:
γfα = bfα−rf
Q(df−rf−τf + 1). (6)
It guarantees that P
f
P
α∈Astart
f
γfαyfα < 1, and conse-
quently, the completion of the lowest priority request will be
more important than the particular order of requests, but the
earliest possible completion of each request is preferable.
As was the case with the other optimization model, more
than one request cannot be executed in the same order, and
each request should be completed not more than once:
∀f∈ F,
X
q∈Q
xfq≤ 1 (7)
∀q∈ Q,
X
f∈F
xfq≤ 1 (8)
Any completed request is started with one particular possi-
ble angle:
X
α∈Astart
f
yfα =
X
q∈Q
xfq ∀f∈ F. (9)
All requests are completed one after another without empty
slots in line until the satellite stops:
X
f1∈F
xf1(q−1)≥
X
f2∈F
xf2q ∀q >0. (10)
To evaluate the variable κf 1f2 appropriately, the following
system of linear equations is introduced, and each excludes
the impossible values of κf1f2. Firstly, if requests f1 and f2
were completed straight one after another, then κf1,f2 = 1:
κf1f2 + 1≥xf1,q−1 +xf2,q ∀f1,f 2∈ F,q >0. (11)
Each request is followed by not more than one request, and
each request follows after not more than one request:
X
f1∈F
κf1,f2≤ 1 ∀f2∈ F, (12)
X
f2∈F
κf1,f2≤ 1 ∀f1∈ F. (13)
If one request follows another one, then each of these
requests was completed in some order:
κf1f2≤
X
q>0
xf2,q ∀f1,f 2∈ F, (14)
κf1f2≤
X
q<Q−1
xf1,q ∀f1,f 2∈ F. (15)
With the use of predefined mapping Mf1,f2, if the request
f1 starts with angle α1, and the request f2 is the next one,
then the next acquisition start angle is fixed:
yf2α2 + 1≥κf1,f2 +yf1α1 ∀α1∈ Bstart
f1f2 , (16)
where α2 =Mf1,f2(α1).
Additionally, maneuver f1 → f2 is possible only with
particular initial angles for f1. Otherwise, the satellite will
not have enough time to finish the acquisition of the request
f1 and move to the f2:
X
α1∈Bstart
f1 f2
yf1α1≥κf1f2 ∀(f1,f 2)∈ L. (17)
On the other hand, if f1→f2 is an impossible transaction,
then
κf1,f2 = 0 ∀(f1,f 2)̸∈ L. (18)
The final constraint fixes the acquisition start angle for the
1st request in a queue as the earliest possible angle:
yfα 0≥xf 0 ∀f∈ F, (19)
where α0 is an angle corresponding to the beginning of the
DTO for request f.
In contrast to the greedy algorithm, which considered the
requests in the order of open DTO windows, this model is
more intelligent in finding the best path to fit the maximal
number of requests. In the end, the π1 requests reached 98.1%
completion using the Gurobi solver [23]. The solution obtained
through optimization is partly depicted in Fig. 4. Furthermore,
the clusters are connected, calculating the minimum relaying
maneuver time from the last request of the previous cluster
to that of the next. This is illustrated in Fig. 4 as cutting
the beginning of every DTO from the start if it proves
impossible to rotate towards the request in this period. After
this procedure, the next cluster can be treated as independent.
One of the greatest benefits of this model is its compatibility
with both near-term and long-term quantum technology. As a
linear optimization model that uses a grid of binary param-
eters, it can be transformed into QUBO, as it is shown in
App. B, and fit rather quickly to the quantum Ising model,
a model containing arrays of qubits in a grid where their
spin states depend on their neighbors. Furthermore, as this

=== PAGE BREAK ===

7
model functions akin to a minimization problem, it would be
extremely efficient to run on a quantum annealing machine
[24], which could solve optimization problems by slightly
changing the Hamiltonian from a given initial state with a
known minimum to a new state, representing the optimal
solution. However, it is complicated to use the satellite mission
planning problem in the QUBO form via currently available
classical or quantum devices. For example, both D-Wave’s
Leap Hybrid solver [25] and Gurobi have difficulties solving
even a small cluster with 4 requests over a time limit of
1 minute. Still, linear programming can obtain the solution
for the 2000 requests and 2 satellites dataset in less than
3 minutes. This runtime was achieved by decomposing the
clusters so that their final size was small enough to achieve
approximately the same time as the greedy algorithm. Note
that if the same number of requests were simultaneously
considered, the runtime would be noticeably longer.
D. Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a machine learning
paradigm in which an agent interacts with some environment
and trains through informed trial and error. The RL training
algorithm uses reward functions to assign value to the agent’s
actions in any state of the environment. Generally, a state can
have constraints and features. The RL agent can use a policy
model to decide on an action given a state, which subsequently
affects the environment and transforms the state. Suppose the
resultant state of the environment is engineered by the data
scientist to contain a positive reward. In that case, the policy
model is trained to take the appropriate action to maximize
the probability of achieving that reward. The Environment is
a function of a triplet of variables (S,A,P ), where S is a
state space,A is an action space, and P is a transition function.
When the reward function,r, is factored in, a Markov Decision
Process (MDP) is generated with the property ( S, A, P , r),
r : S×A→ R. The Agent starts from state s0 and takes
action a0, for which the reward r0 is obtained in each step
of training and subsequently trains by producing trajectories
T := (s0,a 0,r 0,s 1,a 1,r 1,s 2,a 2,r 2,··· ).
1) RL Environments: Two environments are developed for
this AEOS task: satellite- and request-centred environments.
For each environment, requests are sorted by their DTO open
time.
The satellite-centred environment: the agent views the prob-
lem from the satellite’s perspective and considers the 100
closest (by DTO open time) data points for each satellite,
each utilizing 10 data parameters. Moreover, three additional
features were also made available to the agent: the current
time for the satellite and the latitude and longitude of the
starting point of the last completed request, creating a total
observation space of size 1003. The number of nearest requests
is a variable that depends on task size. A Boolean flag is one
of the features kept for each request, marking each data point
as either complete or incomplete to avoid redundancy, and the
observation space is made to only consider requests that are
marked as incomplete to expedite the computations required
by the agent, which is built as a neural network.
Once the request is selected, the agent is rewarded with 1 if
that request is completed and 0 otherwise. With this process
recurring, the agent attempts to complete as many requests as
possible until the time of the satellite is greater than the DTO
windows of all remaining requests, meaning they can no longer
be completed. The agent works with each satellite and predicts
which request must be done. The data used in this environment
was artificially generated. The request-centred environment: at
each step, the agent views the problem from the perspective of
a request, deciding which satellite is best suited to complete
it. The 5 nearest request options are determined by DTO open
time for each satellite, and the request to execute is chosen
by the minimum request execution time. This minimum time
is calculated as the sum of the satellite timestamp, maneuver
duration and the acquisition time due to solution chaining. It
must be less than the request DTO end time for completion.
This procedure is then iterated with the next batch of 5 nearest
satellites.
2) Proximal Policy Optimization: The Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) algorithm, shown in Fig. 5 and first
introduced in Ref. [26], was implemented to provide a mission
planning policy. In RL, a policy is an operation that maps
an action space to a state space. The agent learns the best
action for each situation by calculating the policy gradients.
In other words, the agent uses gradient descent to calculate
the expected value of each action at a certain state space
and determine which action has the likelihood of the highest
reward. The equation for the PPO algorithm is as follows:
L(θ) = ¯Et[min(rt(θ) ¯At, clip(rt(θ), 1−ϵ, 1 +ϵ) ¯At)] (20)
where ¯Et is the current expected value of the policy, θ is the
policy parameter, ϵ is the hyperparameter, ¯At is the estimated
advantage provided by the PPO at time t, and rt(θ) is the
importance sampling ratio. This ratio, derived from the Monte
Carlo sampling methods [26], denotes the ratio of probabilities
under both the old and the new policies. By keeping the value
of ϵ small, the model ensures that the update on the policy at
each increment is not too large; as a consequence, the learning
done by the model stays relevant.
3) Hybrid-quantum PPO: Inspired by the quantum ad-
vantage shown in Refs. [13]–[15], [27]–[30], this section
investigates the utility of a hybrid-quantum neural network
as a policy model for RL. Fig. 5(b) illustrates the specific
policy network within a hybrid MLP model. In the quantum-
classical network, the output of the classical neural network
is used as inputs to a parametrized quantum circuit (PQC).
PQCs are quantum circuits that use parametrized quantum
gates [31], [32] such as Pauli rotations to encode data, x,
and trainable parameters, θ. The four-qubit PQC used in this
work consists of three significant components: variational, data
encoding, and measurement. The variational layer comprises a
layer of Pauli-X rotations encoding four trainable parameters
and ring-shaped CNOTs for entanglement. The data encod-
ing layer embedded four features in parallel using Pauli-Z
rotations, and the measurement layer comprised two Z-basis
measurements on the first two qubits. In sequence, four qubits
were initialized in the ground state, and then a variational layer
with randomly initialized parameters was appended, followed

=== PAGE BREAK ===

8
Coordinates for prior
request start point
Observations S(t)
• Request ID
• Priority
• Satellite ID
• Request start and 
  end times 
• Request start
  (lat, long)
• Request end 
  (lat,  long)
• Flag for completed
  or not
request 1request 100
Environment
Compares probability ratios between sample
and target policies to maximize performance
100
requests
1003
neurons
Maximum
256
neurons
256
neurons
A(t)
Satellite time
Quantum Depth-Infused Layer
8 layers
256 128 64 32
Action A(t): Satellite choice
• the chosen satellite is given 
  2 nearest in time requests 
  to choose from 
• the nearest possible request 
  is completed
• in case it is not possible 
  to complete any of 2 requests 
  — no request is chosen by
  the satellite
Reward R(t):
• If request completed 
  R(t)=1 
• Else 
  R(t)=0
neurons
+
+
+
+
+ + +
+
+
+
Fig. 5. (a) The reinforcement learning PPO model used to solve the mission planning problem. The state of the model encompasses the data of 100 requests,
which are fed into the MLP agent to output an action (one request that is selected to complete), which then feeds into the environment (clip equation),
generates an appropriate reward, and updates the state. (b) Quantum-hybrid reinforcement learning model. A quantum circuit (left) is added to the beginning
of the MLP Agent in the RL model (right) to incorporate quantum computation into the neural network.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

9
RL PPO solution for cluster 1 RL PPO solution for cluster 2
 RL PPO solution for cluster
Satellite maneuvers Data take opportunities for requests Acquisitions
Fig. 6. Visualization of the chaining process used to complete requests within each cluster of the PPO algorithm.
Environment
256
32
Encoding
Network
Parallel Hybrid Network
Quantum Depth-Infused Layer
Compute Losses
Value
State features
Training Batches
Action
Softmax
1. Select
2. Compute Priors & Value
3. Expand
4. Backup
8 layers
Policy Network
+
+
+
+
+ + +
+
+
+
32
Value Network
Fig. 7. The hybrid AlphaZero architecture used to achieve a near-optimal solution to the satellite mission planning.
by eight repetitions of encoding and variational layers. Each of
the eight encoding layers encoded four features of the dataset,
which created a lattice of 32 features across the four qubits.
Finally, the measurement layer was included to produce two
classical real-valued outputs. Fig. 8(a) shows this improvement
in practice: the hybrid quantum neural network achieves a
higher reward in only 8k steps which remains inaccessible
to a classical network of the same complexity even after 110k
environment steps. Notably, these two networks were trained
five times with varying initialization points, and the plot in Fig
Fig. 8(a) only shows the best runs of the hybrid and the clas-
sical models. The reader might notice that the hybrid model
starts at a higher mean reward than the classical, a behaviour
observed elsewhere in the literature [13]. Additionally, the
quick ascent aligns with the findings of Ref. [33], suggesting
that quantum models can generalize from a few data points.
4) Hybrid AlphaZero: The optimal results are expected
from picking the best candidate from part of the solution
pipeline. Specifically, in Sec. III-D, it was shown that re-
inforcement learning is a powerful algorithm that can be
boosted in training and solution optimality through hybridiza-
tion with quantum models. This section shows hybridized
AlphaZero [16].
The classical AlphaZero was a reinforcement learning (RL)
algorithm developed by DeepMind that showed promise in
solving difficult RL problems, such as chess, shogi, and
go [16]. AlphaZero uses a computational tree of environment
states whose values and probabilities are determined from

=== PAGE BREAK ===

10
Fig. 8. (a) The rewards the classical and hybrid PPO RL agents achieve. The hybrid model reaches a higher reward at a significantly improved learning
speed. (b) The agent reaches a maximum normalized reward of 0.464 after 70,000 steps of the simulation. This is compared to a total possible reward of
0.471, translating to an accuracy of 98.5%.
TABLE III
A SUMMARY OF THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ALGORITHMS ON THE 2000 REQUESTS TASK PERFORMED WITH 2 SATELLITES . T HE COMPARISON
DEMONSTRATES THE GREEDY ALGORITHM AS A BASELINE , THE HYBRID ALPHA ZERO, AND INTEGER OPTIMIZATION MODELS .
Model Greedy only Greedy + KMeans RL (Hybrid AlphaZero) Optimization
π1 Completion % 75.8% 63.6% 98.5% 98.1%
the outputs of value and policy networks. The AlphaZero
implementation in this work comprises four parts: a Monte
Carlo tree search (MCTS), an encoding network, a policy
network, and a value network.
The foundation of this model is akin to a Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS) model, which is used primarily for path
prediction problems and board games based on strategy [34],
[35]. The four major components of MCTS are selection,
expansion, simulation, and backpropagation. The model begins
at the tree’s root and selects optimal child nodes until it reaches
a leaf. Once it reaches the leaf, it expands the tree, creating
a new child node. Then, the model simulates the remainder
of the path-finding process from the newly created node
and finally backpropagates with the newfound information to
update the hyperparameters of the tree. The hybrid AlphaZero
model uses MCTS with a parametrized quantum circuit as its
policy network. The MLP agent of the model first recommends
a state action. Then the action is applied to the environment,
generating a reward and an updated state. However, in this
case, the environment is the MCTS model; the recommended
action is simulated in the model. Then, the backpropagation
step of the MCTS is used to update the weights within the
tree itself to refine its recommendations.
As each iteration of this loop occurs, there is also an outer
loop in this algorithm. That outer loop is primarily concerned
with the loss values being optimized; as a result, once the agent
recommends an action, the outer loop takes training examples
of a certain size and simulates the results over these batches to
calculate the policy loss, value loss, and total loss. Once these
values are calculated, the neural network weights are adjusted
and fed back into the original loop, where the cycle repeats
until the loss values are optimized.
Fig. 7 illustrates the inner workings of the hybrid AlphaZero
model employed in this paper. The state variables are passed
into an initial encoding network with 2 hidden layers of
sizes 256 and 32 neurons. The information is then passed in
parallel [36] to 1) a single neuron using a fully-connected layer
and 2) a policy network as a PQC. The PQC resembles the one
explained and implemented in the PPO model in Sec. III-D3.
Fig 8(b) shows the training performance of this model (best
out of five tries), which achieves a completion rate of π1 =
98.5%. Presenting the highest π1 completion rate on the 2000
requests and 2 satellites dataset of any other model explored
in this paper. The completion rates of the highest-performing
algorithms from each section on this dataset are displayed in
Fig. III.
IV. D ISCUSSION
This work provided two classes of solutions to the schedul-
ing problem of satellite mission planning: optimization and
hybridized reinforcement learning. From each class, the best-
performing candidates were the integer optimization model
and the hybrid AlphaZero, respectively. The dataset with 2
satellites and 2000 was used as a performance benchmark for
the algorithms presented in this work. The optimization and
hybrid AlphaZero algorithms achieved π1 completion rates of
98.1% and 98.5%, respectively, while the greedy algorithm
only exhibited a 78.5% (63.6% with k-means clustering)
completion rate. In the single satellite model, the optimization
algorithm reached 100% completion onπ1,π2, andπ3 requests
and 96.2% completion on π4 requests in 6 minutes. This work
showed that by using reinforcement learning and optimization
models, it is possible to improve the results of mission
planning that are otherwise obtained through simple greedy
models. This work presents a step towards creating quantum-
enhanced solutions in the space industry.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Chini, G. Giambene, and S. Kota, “A survey on mobile satellite
systems,” Int. J. Satellite Communications Networking , vol. 28, pp. 29–
57, 2009.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

11
[2] E. Dziadczyk, W. Zabierowski, and A. Napieralski, “Satellite navigation
system gps,” in 2007 9th International Conference - The Experience of
Designing and Applications of CAD Systems in Microelectronics , 2007,
pp. 504–506.
[3] B. Jaksic, D. Miljkovic, V . Maksimovic, M. Petrovic, and B. Gvozdic,
“Satellite television transmission in the world - broadcasting systems
and standards,” Acta Scientiarum. Technology, vol. 42, no. 1, p. e44957,
2020.
[4] R. Grasset-Bourdel, G. Verfaillie, and A. Flipo, “Planning and replan-
ning for a constellation of agile earth observation satellites,” in ICAPS-
11 Workshop on Scheduling and Planning Applications (SPARK-11) ,
Freiburg, Germany, 2011.
[5] Y . Huang, Z. Mu, S. Wu, B. Cui, and Y . Duan, “Revising the observation
satellite scheduling problem based on deep reinforcement learning,”
Remote Sensing, vol. 13, no. 12, 2021.
[6] M. Lemaitre, G. Verfaillie, F. Jouhaud, J.-M. Lachiver, and N. Bataille,
“Selecting and scheduling observations of agile satellites,” Aerospace
Science and Technology, vol. 6, pp. 367–381, 2002.
[7] H. A. Khojah and M. A. Mosa, “Multi-objective optimization for multi-
satellite scheduling task,” Journal of Soft Computing Exploration, vol. 3,
pp. 19–30, 2022.
[8] J. Biamonte, P. Wittek, N. Pancotti, P. Rebentrost, N. Wiebe, and
S. Lloyd, “Quantum machine learning,” Nature, vol. 549, no. 7671, p.
195, 2017.
[9] V . Dunjko and H. J. Briegel, “Machine learning & artificial intelligence
in the quantum domain: a review of recent progress,” Reports on
Progress in Physics, vol. 81, no. 7, p. 074001, 2018.
[10] A. Melnikov, M. Kordzanganeh, A. Alodjants, and R.-K. Lee, “Quantum
machine learning: from physics to software engineering,” Advances in
Physics: X, vol. 8, no. 1, p. 2165452, 2023.
[11] G. Wu, H. Wang, W. Pedrycz, H. Li, and L. Wang, “Satellite observation
scheduling with a novel adaptive simulated annealing algorithm and a
dynamic task clustering strategy,” Computers & Industrial Engineering ,
vol. 113, pp. 576–588, 2017.
[12] T. Stollenwerk, V . Michaud, E. Lobe, M. Picard, A. Basermann, and
T. Botter, “Image acquisition planning for Earth observation satellites
with a quantum annealer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09724 , 2020.
[13] A. Sagingalieva, A. Kurkin, A. Melnikov, D. Kuhmistrov, M. Perelshtein,
A. Melnikov, A. Skolik, and D. V on Dollen, “Hyperparameter optimiza-
tion of hybrid quantum neural networks for car classification,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2205.04878, 2022.
[14] A. Sagingalieva, M. Kordzanganeh, N. Kenbayev, D. Kosichkina,
T. Tomashuk, and A. Melnikov, “Hybrid quantum neural network for
drug response prediction,” Cancers, vol. 15, no. 10, p. 2705, 2023.
[15] M. Perelshtein, A. Sagingalieva, K. Pinto, V . Shete, A. Pakhomchik,
A. Melnikov, F. Neukart, G. Gesek, A. Melnikov, and V . Vinokur, “Prac-
tical application-specific advantage through hybrid quantum computing,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.04858 , 2022.
[16] D. Silver, T. Hubert, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, M. Lai, A. Guez,
M. Lanctot, L. Sifre, D. Kumaran, T. Graepel et al. , “A general
reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go
through self-play,” Science, vol. 362, no. 6419, pp. 1140–1144, 2018.
[17] M. Kordzanganeh, M. Buchberger, B. Kyriacou, M. Povolotskii, W. Fis-
cher, A. Kurkin, W. Somogyi, A. Sagingalieva, M. Pflitsch, and A. Mel-
nikov, “Benchmarking simulated and physical quantum processing units
using quantum and hybrid algorithms,” Advanced Quantum Technolo-
gies, vol. 6, p. 2300043, 2023.
[18] X. Jin and J. Han, K-Means Clustering . Boston, MA: Springer US,
2010, pp. 563–564.
[19] J. MacQueen, “Classification and analysis of multivariate observations,”
in 5th Berkeley Symp. Math. Statist. Probability , 1967, pp. 281–297.
[20] S. Kilic, “An optimization approach for the daily photograph selection
of earth observation satellites,” Havacılık ve Uzay Teknolojileri Dergisi,
vol. 12, 2019.
[21] A. Land and A. Doig, “An automatic method of solving discrete
programming problems,” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric
Society, pp. 497–520, 1960.
[22] L. Maisonobe, V . Pommier, and P. Parraud, “Orekit: An open source
library for operational flight dynamics applications,” in 4th international
conference on astrodynamics tools and techniques . ESAC Madrid,
2010, pp. 3–6.
[23] Gurobi Optimization, LLC, “Gurobi optimizer reference manual,” 2022.
[24] E. Tosatti, “Optimization using quantum mechanics: quantum annealing
through adiabatic evolution,” Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and
Theoretical, vol. 41, p. 209801, 2008.
[25] M. W. Johnson, M. H. S. Amin, S. Gildert, T. Lanting, F. Hamze,
N. Dickson, R. Harris, A. J. Berkley, J. Johansson, P. Bunyk, E. M.
Chapple, C. Enderud, J. P. Hilton, K. Karimi, E. Ladizinsky et al. ,
“Quantum annealing with manufactured spins,” Nature, vol. 473, no.
7346, pp. 194–198, 2011.
[26] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Prox-
imal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347,
2017.
[27] S. Jerbi, C. Gyurik, S. Marshall, H. Briegel, and V . Dunjko,
“Parametrized quantum policies for reinforcement learning,” Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 34, pp. 28 362–28 375,
2021.
[28] A. Skolik, S. Jerbi, and V . Dunjko, “Quantum agents in the Gym: a
variational quantum algorithm for deep Q-learning,” Quantum, vol. 6,
p. 720, 2022.
[29] A. Senokosov, A. Sedykh, A. Sagingalieva, and A. Melnikov,
“Quantum machine learning for image classification,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.09224, 2023.
[30] A. Sedykh, M. Podapaka, A. Sagingalieva, N. Smertyak, K. Pinto,
M. Pflitsch, and A. Melnikov, “Quantum physics-informed neural net-
works for simulating computational fluid dynamics in complex shapes,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.11247 , 2023.
[31] M. Benedetti, E. Lloyd, S. Sack, and M. Fiorentini, “Parameterized
quantum circuits as machine learning models,” Quantum Science and
Technology, vol. 4, no. 4, p. 043001, 2019.
[32] M. Schuld and N. Killoran, “Quantum machine learning in feature
hilbert spaces,” Physical Review Letters , vol. 122, no. 4, p. 040504,
2019.
[33] M. C. Caro, H.-Y . Huang, M. Cerezo, K. Sharma, A. Sornborger,
L. Cincio, and P. J. Coles, “Generalization in quantum machine learning
from few training data,” Nature communications, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 4919,
2022.
[34] G. Chaslot, S. Bakkes, I. Szita, and P. Spronck, “Monte-carlo tree search:
A new framework for game ai,” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment , vol. 4,
p. 216–217, 2008.
[35] B.-D. Lee, “Monte-carlo tree search applied to the game of tic-tac-toe,”
Journal of Korea Game Society , vol. 14, pp. 47–54, 2014.
[36] M. Kordzanganeh, D. Kosichkina, and A. Melnikov, “Parallel hybrid
networks: an interplay between quantum and classical neural networks,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03227 , 2023.
[37] A. Pakhomchik, S. Yudin, M. Perelshtein, A. Alekseyenko, and
S. Yarkoni, “Solving workflow scheduling problems with QUBO mod-
eling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.04844 , 2022.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

12
APPENDIX
A. Bunching algorithms
Below are a few bunching algorithms used to cluster the
data purely by sorting with respect to certain dataset features.
1) DTO Bunching: This algorithm first sorts the data by the
DTO start times. After that, the data points are clustered by
DTO overlap. In other words, all entries in any given cluster
share at least one portion of their DTO windows with all other
requests in the same cluster. As DTO windows are defined
by the time when the satellite is in a position to capture the
request, this method also functions as a form of geographical
clustering due to the correlation of the location and DTO times.
2) Priority Bunching: In this algorithm, the requests are
simply clustered by their priority ranks (1-4) and then ordered
by the DTO start times. The utility of this lies greatly in the
importance of the priority rankings, as the algorithm operates
on the premise of each priority rank request being worth n
times a request of the next highest priority rank, where n is
the order of magnitude between two priority sets (for instance,
a priority 1 request would be n2 times as valuable as a priority
3 request).
3) Bunch Sort: This algorithm puts together the two clus-
tering algorithms above, in a sense. First, the data is sorted by
DTO windows, after which it is clustered by the DTO overlap.
However, after that, the data is sorted within each cluster, this
time by the end of their DTO windows and then by priority
index. Consequently, data points with the same priority in the
same cluster are ranked by the end of their DTO windows,
maintaining the DTO structure within the priority indexing
structure.
B. QUBO formulation
Adiabatic quantum computers can approximately solve NP-
hard problems, such as quadratic unconstrained binary op-
timization, faster than classical computers. Since many ma-
chine learning problems are also NP-hard, adiabatic quan-
tum computers might be instrumental in training machine
learning models efficiently in the post-Moore’s law era. To
solve problems on adiabatic quantum computers, they must
be formulated as QUBO problems, which is possible by
several techniques. This paper formulated the problem as a
QUBO problem, making it conducive to being trained on
adiabatic quantum computers. Since all the constraints will
go into the cost function with some coefficients, they must be
algebraically reformulated. Below are examples of how these
constraints change according to the QUBO formulation.
∀f∈ F,
X
q∈Q
xfq≤ 1⇒

X
q∈Q
xfq− 1
2


2
, (21)
∀q∈ Q,
X
f∈F
xfq≤ 1⇒

X
f∈F
xfq− 1
2


2
, (22)
∀f∈ F,
X
α∈Astart
f
yfα =
X
q∈Q
xfq⇒ (23)

 X
α∈Astart
f
yfα−
X
q∈Q
xfq


2
, (24)
∀q >0,
X
f1∈F
xf1q−1≥
X
f2∈F
xf2q⇒
X
f∈F
(xf2q−xf1q−1) +
X
i
2izi = 0,
(25)
where zi is a slack binary variable, and the number of
slack variables depends on the problem. Thus, the idea of
the QUBO formulation is to reduce all constraints to linear
equalities, square them and then pose as penalties in the cost
function. The more rigorous analysis of the slack variable
implementation is provided in [37]. QUBO formulation is
written in general terms as:
Q =Q0 +βC, C≥ 0, (26)
whereQ is a cost function, Q0 is the objective function of the
initial problem,β are some coefficients that must be picked up,
C are non-negative definite quadratic constraints. The solution
then takes the following form:
Q[q] = min
κ
Q[κ]. (27)
In the case where C[q] > 0, it is possible to choose such β,
that if q is unconstrained optimum, then it must be feasible.
Beta is chosen such that if q is not feasible, then:
Q[q]>Q [feas] =Q[0] = 0, (28)
where Q[feas] means the initial zero solution.
The initial objective function that was used for the classical
solution will take the following form for the quantum solution:
Q0 =−
X
f∈F
(
X
q∈Q
Jfx2
fq−
X
α∈Astart
f
γfαy2
fα)→ min. (29)
Also, the odds β are chosen so that there is a better solution
when the constraints are violated:
C[q]> 0⇒Q[q]≥Q0[q] +β >0. (30)
Accordingly, in this case it is necessary to take β >−Q0[q].
The boundaries of q must be estimated, as the precise values
are undetermined. The worst estimate was chosen as the
following:
β >−Q[q] =−(min
κ
Q0[κ]) =−(−
X
f
Jf) =
X
f
Jf. (31)
C. Greedy algorithm
Fig. 9 showcases the logic of the greedy algorithm from
Sec. III-B.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

13
Fig. 9. The flowchart used to implement the greedy algorithm in Sec. III-B. The time-incrementing block references the ”open DTO windows” query. Without
accessible DTOs within a cluster, satellites remain idle under the greedy algorithm, with the simulation advancing until availability arises. Upon addressing
all requests, satellites transition to the subsequent cluster and replicate the procedure. Note that the connection between one-second time increments and new
clusters is implicit rather than explicit.