Quantum Computing – Strategic
Recommendations for the Industry
Marvin Erdmann∗1, Lukas Karch1, Abhishek Awasthi 2, Caitlin Isobel
Jones2, Pallavi Bhardwaj 3, Florian Krellner 3, Jonas Stein 4, Claudia
Linnhoff-Popien4, Nico Kraus 5, Peter Eder 6,7, Sarah Braun 6, and Tong Liu 6
1BMW Group, Munich, Germany
2BASF Digital Solutions GmbH, Ludwigshafen, Germany
3SAP SE, Walldorf, Germany
4LMU Munich, Munich, Germany
5Aqarios GmbH, Munich, Germany
6Siemens AG, Garching, Germany
7Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany
Abstract
This whitepaper surveys the current landscape and short- to mid-
term prospects for quantum-enabled optimization and machine learn-
ing use cases in industrial settings. Grounded in the QCHALLenge
program, it synthesizes hardware trajectories from different quantum
architectures and providers, and assesses their maturity and poten-
tial for real-world use cases under a standardized traffic-light evalua-
tion framework. We provide a concise summary of relevant hardware
roadmaps, distinguishing superconducting and ion-trap technologies,
their current states, modalities, and projected scaling trajectories.
The core of the presented work are the use case evaluations in the
domains of optimization problems and machine learning applications.
For the conducted experiments, we apply a consistent set of evalua-
tion criteria (model formulation, scalability, solution quality, runtime,
and transferability) which are assessed in a shared system of three
categories, ranging from optimistic (solutions produced by quantum
computers are competitive with classical methods and/or a clear path
to a quantum advantage is shown) to pessimistic (significant hurdles
prevent practical application of quantum solutions now and poten-
tially in the future). The resulting verdicts illuminate where quantum
approaches currently offer promise, where hybrid classical-quantum
strategies are most viable, and where classical methods are expected
to remain superior.
∗Corresponding author: marvin.erdmann@bmw.de
1
arXiv:2601.08578v1  [quant-ph]  13 Jan 2026

=== PAGE BREAK ===

1 Introduction
The project ”Quantum-Classical Hybrid Optimization Algorithms for Logis-
tics and Production Line Management” (QCHALLenge), funded by the Ger-
man Federal Ministry of Research, Technology and Space (BMFTR), explores
the industrial applicability of quantum computing (QC) in optimization and
machine learning [1]. Led by a consortium including BASF, BMW Group,
SAP SE, Siemens, and LMU Munich, the project aims to evaluate quantum-
classical hybrid algorithms for real-world production and logistics challenges.
Several industrial use cases are tested on different quantum algorithms, along
with their implementations on noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) de-
vices, focusing on hybrid software that mitigates hardware limitations such
as low qubit counts, limited connectivity, and error susceptibility. These
algorithms are benchmarked against classical solvers to test efficacy of quan-
tum algorithms and the quantum hardware. Benchmarking is central to the
project’s technical roadmap. During the course of this project, we utilize
quantum hardware from IBM, IonQ, DWave [2, 3].
Key aspects of the QCHALLenge projects are:
•A top-down approach and focuses on application-layer tools to reduce
complexity for non-experts.
•Development of a hybrid analysis and evaluation tool to assess problem
complexity and performance across QC hardware.
•Emphasis on logistics and production due to their high industrial rele-
vance and repeatability.
This report is part of one of the overarching goals of QCHALLenge in
providing methodological recommendations for the industry, grounded in the
estimated business impact of QC on selected use cases in production and
logistics. This catalog also includes the QC roadmaps of several hardware
vendors tested during this project, and their suitability for use cases provided
by the project members. Please note, that we refer to the hardware vendors’
respective technology roadmaps publicly available on the date of publication
of this work.
The QCHALLenge project is part of a broader quantum ecosystem and
connects the following other projects, initiatives and industries.
2

=== PAGE BREAK ===

•PlanQK: Commercial quantum platform focused on small and medium-
sized enterprises; QCHALLenge complements it by targeting large in-
dustry [4].
•Luna: Commercial quantum solution suite provided by Aqarios, a spin-
off from the Quantum Applications and Research Laboratory (QAR-
Lab) at LMU Munich; They collaborated with all members of QCHAL-
Lenge and supported the research for this study [5].
•QUARK: Quantum computing application benchmarking framework;
QCHALLenge provides public plugin with its use cases and metrics [6].
•QuCUN: User-oriented quantum computing platform; QCHALLenge
contributes tools and demonstrators [7].
•QUTAC: Industry consortium; QCHALLenge aligns with its mission
to industrialize quantum computing [8].
•Events & Dissemination: QCHALLenge contributes to high-profile con-
ferences and public events like the Bitkom Quantum Summit and mul-
tiple QCE conferences and informs the public about these events on its
own webpage [9–11].
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents
the publicly available technology roadmaps of selected quantum hardware
providers with a focus on quantum architectures that were used in the experi-
ments conducted for this study, namely superconducting devices (Section 2.1)
and ion traps (Section 2.2). In Section 3, we first introduce the categories
and the evaluation framework used to assess the performance and potential
of quantum approaches in this work. Following that, we describe industry
applications from the domains of optimization problems (Section 3.2) and
machine learning (Section 3.3), assess the capabilities of quantum solutions,
and make a verdict on the potential of quantum computing for each case.
We conclude with an overview (Section 3.4) and outlook on the promises of
quantum computing for industrial use cases based on our results and give
recommendations for users of the evaluated technologies (Section 4).
3

=== PAGE BREAK ===

2 Quantum Hardware Roadmap
Quantum hardware roadmaps are a foundational element for both indus-
try and research, enabling strategic planning, prioritization, and disciplined
resource allocation across projects, budgets, and time horizons. A reliable
roadmap translates technical capability ceilings into actionable milestones,
supports risk assessment, and guides decisions on experimentation, procure-
ment, and collaboration. By aligning anticipated hardware evolutions with
concrete use cases, organizations can anticipate near-term feasibility, adjust
expectations for mid- to long-term impact, and orchestrate the allocation of
expertise, resources, and funding accordingly. In this sense, robust roadmaps
are the basis for the entire development pipeline from research to deployment.
Qubit counts, while the most transparent and widely communicated met-
ric offered by vendors, constitute only one dimension of quantum hardware
capacity. Other critical factors are also relevant for practical performance:
qubit quality, including coherence times and gate fidelities; qubit connectiv-
ity and the architectural layout that determines embeddability; error rates
and the prospects for error correction; the breadth of native gate sets; and
the maturity of software stacks, including compilers, embedding techniques,
and ecosystem tooling [12]. Nevertheless, for the purposes of this study, we
employ qubit counts as the core metric. This choice reflects the practical
advantages of qubit-count comparisons: they offer a straightforward, con-
sistently reported benchmark that facilitates the evaluation across diverse
hardware platforms and provides an intuitive basis for long-range planning
and cross-site benchmarking.
This section focuses on the product roadmaps of providers that build two
kinds of quantum technology. Section 2.1 surveys superconducting quan-
tum computers, detailing their current state, the coexistence of gate-based
and annealing modalities within this modality, and the prevailing scaling
trajectories in terms of qubit counts. Section 2.2 turns to ion-trap-based
quantum computers, describes their physical concept, and presents the tech-
nology roadmaps of providers of such devices. Alternative quantum-related
hardware families, such as neutral-atom-based [13], photonic [14] and topo-
logical quantum computers [15], were not used for the evaluation of the use
cases in this study and are therefore not in the focus of this section.
4

=== PAGE BREAK ===

2.1 Superconducting Quantum Computers
Superconducting devices represent a prominent class of quantum computing
technology, distinguished by their use of superconducting materials to create
qubits. These qubits operate at extremely low temperatures, where materi-
als exhibit zero electrical resistance, allowing for the efficient manipulation
of quantum states. Superconducting qubits are typically implemented us-
ing Josephson junctions, which enable the creation of non-linear inductive
elements that are essential for quantum operations.
One of the key advantages of superconducting devices is their compatibil-
ity with existing semiconductor fabrication techniques, which can accelerate
the development and scaling of quantum systems. This compatibility allows
for the potential mass production of superconducting qubits, making them
a viable option for future quantum computing applications. However, chal-
lenges remain, particularly in terms of managing the thermal environment
and minimizing noise, which can adversely affect qubit performance.
Superconducting qubits are one of several ways how to realize quantum
computing hardware (another are ion traps which are introduced in Sec-
tion 2.2). Two computational methods that use superconducting qubits are
quantum annealing and gate-based devices.
One of the primary distinctions between gate-based quantum computing
and quantum annealers lies in their operational principles. Gate-based sys-
tems rely on a sequence of quantum gates to perform calculations. These
gates manipulate the quantum states of qubits, allowing for the implementa-
tion of universal quantum algorithms. The flexibility of gate-based quantum
computers enables them to tackle a broad spectrum of problems, from fac-
toring large numbers to simulating quantum systems.
In contrast, quantum annealers are specifically designed for optimization
problems. They operate by finding the lowest energy state of a system, which
corresponds to the optimal solution of a given problem. Quantum annealers
do not utilize a series of gates; instead, they leverage quantum tunneling
and superposition to explore multiple solutions simultaneously. This makes
them particularly effective for specific types of optimization tasks, but less
versatile than gate-based systems for general-purpose quantum computing.
5

=== PAGE BREAK ===

2.1.1 Quantum Annealers
Quantum annealing is a distinct approach within the realm of quantum com-
puting, setting itself apart from other quantum technologies such as gate-
based quantum computing. In contrast to other quantum technologies that
may require complex circuit designs and extensive error correction, quantum
annealing offers a more direct pathway to solving specific types of optimiza-
tion problems, making it particularly suited for applications where finding
optimal solutions is critical.
The technology roadmap for quantum annealing has seen significant ad-
vancements, particularly through the efforts of companies like D-Wave [16,
17], which has been at the forefront of this technology. The evolution of
quantum annealers has been marked by a steady increase in qubit count and
improvements in hardware capabilities. This growth is crucial as the number
of qubits directly impacts the complexity of problems that can be addressed.
However, the scaling of qubits is not merely a linear progression; it involves
overcoming significant challenges related to embedding problems into the
quantum architecture and ensuring that the qubits maintain coherence long
enough to perform calculations.
The roadmap for quantum annealing also emphasizes the need for en-
hanced error correction and noise reduction techniques. Current quantum
annealers operate in the NISQ era, where qubits are prone to errors that can
affect the reliability of solutions. As such, future developments will focus on
improving qubit fidelity and developing more sophisticated algorithms that
can effectively utilize the available qubits.
Moreover, the anticipated advancements in quantum annealing are not
just about increasing qubit counts. They also involve refining the algorithms
used to translate real-world problems into a quadratic unconstrained binary
optimization (QUBO) model suitable for quantum processing. This trans-
formation is often complex and can introduce inefficiencies that diminish the
potential advantages of quantum solutions over classical methods.
Figure 1 depicts the historic and advertised qubit counts according to
the technology roadmap of D-Wave, as well as the qubit counts of devices
provided by NEC [18] and Qilimanjaro [19], two smaller companies from
Japan and Spain, respectively, with a footprint in quantum annealing.
With a history of 100+ qubit quantum annealers since 2011, D-Wave is
the leading manufacturer of such devices since the very beginning of this tech-
nology’s engineering. Their largest device in terms of the number of qubits is
6

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Advantagewhich was made publicly available in 2020 and features 5760 phys-
ical, superconducting flux qubits [20, 21]. Since then, D-Wave worked on the
successor,Advantage2, which was made fully publicly available in 2025 fo-
cusing on increasing the qubit interconnectivity and coherence, and reducing
noise [22]. While currently being limited to about 4400 physical qubits, D-
Wave communicated their plans to update their devices continuously, aiming
for a 100,000 qubit system in 2030 [23].
Outside of D-Wave, the landscape of quantum annealing hardware pro-
viders is very scarce. NEC Corporation, Tohuku University, Japan’s National
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, and ParityQC all
partnered in 2023 to build an 8-qubit quantum annealing machine, mainly
used for public research [18]. Qilimanjaro went a step beyond that when they
integrated a 10-qubit adiabatic quantum processing unit into the Barcelona
Supercomputing Center in 2025, making it the first high performance com-
puting (HPC-)integrated quantum annealing device in Europe [19, 24]. How-
ever, no future development plans have been communicated by any quantum
annealing hardware provider but D-Wave.
Figure 1: Historical and projected qubit count development of D-Wave’s
quantum annealing devices (blue) compared with qubit counts of devices
manufactured by NEC (orange) and Qilimanjaro (green).
In summary, the future success of quantum annealing will rely on its
advancements in qubit scaling but maybe even more so in overcoming chal-
7

=== PAGE BREAK ===

lenges like limited qubit connectivity, error correction, and algorithmic effi-
ciency. As the technology matures, it may turn out to be the directest path
to a practical quantum advantage by solving complex optimization problems
across various industries. However, achieving these advancements will re-
quire continued research and development to address the inherent challenges
of quantum hardware and algorithm design. The fact that with D-Wave
there is only one globally relevant provider of quantum annealing hardware,
makes this technology relatively vulnerable to the commercial success and
stability of this player in a highly dynamic ecosystem.
2.1.2 Gate-based Devices
Gate-based quantum computing is a versatile approach that utilizes quan-
tum gates to manipulate qubits, enabling the execution of a wide range of
quantum algorithms. This method is characterized by its ability to perform
complex computations through a series of quantum operations, making it
suitable for various applications, including quantum simulations, cryptogra-
phy, and optimization problems.
The roadmaps for gate-based devices from providers like IBM [25] and
IQM [26] foresee rapid advancements, particularly in improving coherence
times, gate fidelities, and the number of physical (and later also logical)
qubits. As researchers continue to refine the design and fabrication processes,
the performance of superconducting qubits has steadily improved, enabling
more complex quantum algorithms to be executed. Additionally, the modular
nature of gate-based circuits allows for the potential integration of various
qubit types and classical control systems, enhancing the overall functionality
of quantum processors.
The graph in Figure 2 includes the historical development of gate-based
quantum computers built by three of the leading providers of this technology
(IBM, Google, and IQM) and the projected development according to their
respective technology roadmaps.
Compared to quantum annealing, the landscape of providers for gate-
based quantum computers is significantly more dense when it comes to qubit
counts. While Google held the record for the most qubits in a gate-based
quantum computer between 2015 and 2020 [27, 28], including theSycamore
processor with which Google claimed quantum supremacy in 2019 [29], IBM’s
Eagleprocessor was the first gate-based quantum computing device with
more than 100 qubits in 2021 [30]. In the same year, IQM provided access
8

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Figure 2: Historic and projected development of the physical qubit counts
of gate-based quantum computers manufactured by IBM (blue), Google (or-
ange), and IQM (green)
to their 5-qubitSparkdevices [31], joining the race for leadership between
manufacturers of superconducting gate-based quantum computers. In 2023,
IBM built the largest such device to date:Condoris a 1121-qubit quantum
processor with which IBM announced ”the beginning of the era of quantum
utility” [32].
Since then, IBM focused on single-qubit quality improvements, qubit con-
nectivity, and modularity, leading to the development of smaller but more
powerful chips in 2024 (Heron[33, 34]) and 2025 (Nighthawk[35]). In
that time frame, Google and IQM closed the gap with GoogleWillow(105
qubits) [36] and IQMRadiance(150 qubits) [37].
According to the hardware roadmaps of IBM [25] and IQM [26], both
providers plan to further scale their quantum machines. Google also pub-
lished a list of milestones they plan to achieve but no concrete timeline [38].
All of them agree on the goal to build an error-corrected, fault-tolerant quan-
tum computer within this decade, starting to formulate their target numbers
in terms of logical qubits rather than physical qubits at some point during
their respective roadmaps (we only consider communicated projections for
physical qubits in the figures presented in this work). This clear path to-
wards fault-tolerance allows to estimate the date at which industry-relevant
9

=== PAGE BREAK ===

problems can be efficiently solved on quantum hardware and will be the basis
on which we evaluated the use cases in Section 3.
In summary, superconducting devices are among the leading technologies
in the quantum computing landscape, characterized by their broad spectrum
of application domains and rapid advancements in performance. As research
progresses, these devices are expected to play a crucial role in the realization
of practical quantum utilization and a potential quantum advantage, capable
of tackling complex, large-scale industry problems that are currently beyond
the reach of classical computing technologies.
2.2 Ion Traps
Ion trap technology is a different approach to realize qubits in the field of
quantum computing compared to superconducting devices. Its distinguishing
feature is its use of charged particles, or ions, as qubits. Unlike supercon-
ducting devices, which rely on solid-state systems, ion traps utilize electro-
magnetic fields to confine and manipulate individual ions in a vacuum. This
method allows for high-fidelity quantum operations, as ions can be precisely
controlled using laser beams to perform quantum gates. The inherent sta-
bility of trapped ions contributes to longer coherence times compared to
many other qubit implementations, making them particularly attractive for
processes that require many quantum gate operations per qubit.
One of the primary differences between ion traps and superconducting
devices lies in their operational environment. Ion traps operate at room tem-
perature, simplifying the cooling requirements compared to superconducting
qubits that must be maintained at cryogenic temperatures. This character-
istic can facilitate easier integration with classical control systems and may
reduce the complexity of the overall quantum computing architecture.
Additionally, ion trap systems typically exhibit a high degree of connec-
tivity between qubits, allowing for more flexible quantum circuit designs.
This contrasts with superconducting devices, where qubit connectivity can
be limited by the physical layout of the chip. The ability to perform entan-
gling operations between any pair of ions in a trap enhances the potential
for implementing complex quantum algorithms.
While offering some theoretical and practical advantages to other qubit
technologies, historically, trapped-ion-based quantum computers also faced
unique challenges, particularly in terms of scalability. While individual ion
traps can achieve excellent performance, creating large-scale quantum pro-
10

=== PAGE BREAK ===

cessors with many qubits remains a significant hurdle for hardware providers
like Quantinuum, IonQ, and AQT. The complexity of managing multiple
ions and ensuring precise control over their interactions can complicate the
scaling process.
The two leading trapped-ion quantum computing manufacturers Quantin-
uum and IonQ advertise considerable increases in qubit counts of upcoming
devices until the year 2030, while AQT does currently not provide a public
hardware roadmap. Figure 3 shows that, in 2025, the largest trapped-ion-
based quantum computer in terms of qubits is Quantinuum Helios with 96
physical Barium-137 qubits [39]. IonQ advertises a device with 2 Million
individual ions within five years from now [40], while Quantinuum expects a
more moderate growth to “1000s physical qubits,” focusing on reducing the
logical error rates, according to their latest technology roadmap [41].
Figure 3: Historic and projected development of trapped-ion-based quantum
computers manufactured by Quantinuum (blue) and IonQ (orange), com-
pared with qubit counts of devices manufactured by AQT (green).
In summary, ion trap technology offers a distinct approach to quantum
computing, characterized by its use of trapped ions as qubits and its op-
erational advantages in terms of coherence and connectivity. As research
continues to advance in this area, ion traps are expected to contribute signif-
icantly to the development of practical quantum computers, complementing
the capabilities of superconducting devices.
11

=== PAGE BREAK ===

3 Industrial Use Cases Considered
One of the most important tasks in the QCHALLenge project is the use
case identification and evaluation in the field of combinatorial optimization
and machine learning with quantum computing. Each use case is assessed
using both classical and QC-based approaches, with an estimation of benefits
with quantum computing and further steps required in obtaining a quantum
advantage.
The code basis used for the experiments conducted for the project is
available as an open-source GitHub repository [42]. The results can also be
reproduced and benchmarked with other solution methods and (quantum)
hardware backends due to its implementation as a plugin of the Quantum
Computing Application Benchmarking (QUARK) framework [6].
3.1 Traffic-Light-based Evaluation
3.1.1 Considered Aspects of Use Cases
Evaluating quantum computing through a set of well-defined, standardized
aspects provides a structured and transparent way to understand its capabil-
ities, limitations, and potential for practical application. These aspects help
identify where quantum approaches already offer advantages, where signifi-
cant challenges remain, and what areas require further research. By apply-
ing consistent criteria across diverse use cases, it becomes possible to make
meaningful comparisons, prioritize development efforts, and understand the
realistic prospects for industrial implementation. Additionally, in some in-
stances, specific use cases may require the examination of supplementary,
use-case-specific aspects. These additional evaluations are intended to high-
light particular advantages, disadvantages, or unique properties of individual
applications, rather than to serve as a basis for direct comparison with other
use cases.
•Model and Implementation: This aspect evaluates how the prob-
lem is formulated and represented in the quantum computing context,
including the specific algorithms, encodings, and problem structures
used. It measures how well the problem fits into quantum-friendly
formats like QUBO or a binary quadratic program (BQP) and how ef-
fectively the model can be implemented on quantum hardware, e.g., if
12

=== PAGE BREAK ===

slack variables are needed to implement constraints and if they hinder
the performance.
•Scalability: This aspect assesses the ability of quantum computing
approaches to handle increasing problem sizes. It considers the number
of variables, qubits, and the computational resources needed as the
problem complexity grows, and whether current or future hardware
can support large-scale industrial problems.
•Solution Quality: This measures the optimality, accuracy, and stabil-
ity of solutions produced by quantum algorithms compared to classical
methods. It evaluates whether quantum approaches can find better,
faster, or more reliable solutions in practice.
•Runtime: This aspect examines the time efficiency of quantum solu-
tions in comparison to classical methods. It considers the total time
taken for problem solving, including embedding, execution, and post-
processing, and its suitability for real-time or near-real-time applica-
tions.
•Transferability: This evaluates the applicability of quantum solutions
across different problem types or domains. It reflects the flexibility of
the evaluated quantum methods to adapt to various use cases and the
potential for broad industrial deployment.
3.1.2 Categories, Evaluation, and Verdict
The traffic-light-based system is a straightforward and intuitive method for
categorizing the performance and potential of quantum computing across dif-
ferent aspects. By using the colors green, yellow, and red, this system quickly
conveys the current state, short-term prospects, and long-term challenges
associated with each aspect. Green indicates that quantum approaches are
competitive or promising, yellow signifies areas where benefits are uncertain
or depend on future developments, and red highlights aspects where signifi-
cant hurdles prevent practical application now and potentially in the future.
This visual and easily understandable framework facilitates clear communi-
cation of complex technical evaluations, helping stakeholders quickly grasp
the strengths and limitations of quantum computing in various use cases. It
also supports strategic decision-making by highlighting priority areas for re-
search and development, as well as identifying aspects that require long-term
13

=== PAGE BREAK ===

investment and innovation, which is provided at the conclusion of each use
case section in theverdict.
•Green Light: In these aspects, quantum computing (or hybrid ap-
proaches) is competitive to or better than classical methods evaluated
for this use case. There is a clear path to a tangible short-term quantum
advantage.
•Yellow Light: It remains to be seen if and when quantum comput-
ers can compete or provide a benefit in aspects categorized as yellow
compared to classical solutions.
•Red Light: The results produced in this study clearly indicate that
quantum computing cannot compete with classical methods in regards
of these aspects. According to the available technology roadmaps, there
is no clear path to quantum advantage within the next five to eight
years.
3.2 Optimization Use Cases
The QCHALLenge project tackles a diverse set of industrial optimization
use cases, each selected for its complexity, economic relevance, and potential
for quantum advantage. These use cases span multiple industrial consortium
partners, and are designed to benchmark quantum computing approaches
against classical methods. Each use case is rigorously benchmarked on both
simulated and real quantum hardware (if possible), including D-Wave, IBM
and IonQ quantum computers, to assess feasibility and performance.
In the next sections, we present a short description of the use cases, along
with the modeling of the problems for classical and quantum solvers, as the
mathematical model of a problem is one of the most important aspects of
any solving method (classical or quantum). We then present the overview of
the evaluation of different aspects of the use case as described above.
3.2.1 Production Assignment and Scheduling
The Production Assignment and Scheduling problem is an NP-hard combina-
torial optimization problem involving several jobs and machines and focuses
on balancing the processing time on the machines and reducing the manufac-
turing time of products while maximizing the value of the produced items,
as shown in Figure 4.
14

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Figure 4: An exemplary solution to a problem with 16 jobs and 4 machines.
The idle times of the machines between adjacent jobs depict the required
set-up times. The objective is to reduce the total setup time, uniformly
distribute the busy times of all machines, and maximize the total value [2].
This optimization task arises, e.g., at business units of BASF. Currently,
the optimization process, i.e., finding an optimal or good enough solution,
is a time-consuming process and any significant speed-up is highly desirable,
especially in the case of an inadvertent breakdown of operations. In the
project, quantum annealing and hybrid quantum annealing approaches are
tested against the industry scale classical solver.
We develop two distinct mathematical models tailored to the strengths of
each solver type. For classical solvers, the problem is formulated as a mixed-
integer convex program, leveraging the structure and precision of traditional
optimization techniques. In contrast, the quantum-classical approach uses a
BQP formulation, which aligns with the capabilities of D-Wave’s Leap Hybrid
Solver [43]. This modeling choice ensures that each solver is evaluated using
the most appropriate representation of the problem, allowing for a fair and
meaningful comparison.
The benchmarking spans problem sizes up to approximately 150,000 vari-
ables, a scale that reflects genuine industrial complexity. The study compares
an industry-grade classical solver with D-Wave’s hybrid quantum solver, an-
alyzing performance across various metrics. Notably, the quantum-classical
solver delivers competitive results, and in some cases, even outperforms the
classical solver in terms of speed, demonstrating the potential of hybrid ap-
proaches in production environments.
15

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Traffic-Light-based Evaluation
•Green Light
– Scalability: The results from this use case demonstrate that D-
Wave’s hybrid quantum solver can handle problem sizes up to
150,000 variables, which is significant for real-world industrial
scheduling. This shows that quantum-classical solvers are not just
theoretical but can scale to practical workloads.
– Runtime: In some benchmark cases, the quantum-classical solver
outperformed the classical solver in speed, especially when the
problem was modeled in a way that suits quantum optimization
(e.g., binary quadratic format). This is a strong indicator of quan-
tum benefit when the problem structure is well aligned.
•Yellow Light
– Model and Implementation: The quantum solver’s perfor-
mance is highly dependent on how the problem is formulated.
The binary quadratic model was necessary to solve the problem
efficiently with a quantum computer, while the classical solver
benefited from a convex formulation. This means quantum bene-
fit is not automatic – it requires thoughtful modeling.
– Solution Quality: The study shows that while quantum solvers
can be competitive, classical solvers still excel in certain struc-
tured problems. The benefit of quantum solvers is conditional on
problem type and formulation, not universal.
•Red Light
– Transferability: The current size of pure quantum hardware
does not allow to address limitations like qubit count, connectiv-
ity, or noise – factors that still constrain quantum computing in
practice. These could limit applicability in other domains or on
different hardware.
–No Pure Quantum Benchmark: Since the currently available quan-
tum annealers can not handle the problem sizes which are practi-
cally relevant in industry, this work uses D-Wave’s hybrid solver,
which combines classical and quantum resources. However, there
16

=== PAGE BREAK ===

is no clear information of the amount of quantum computing car-
ried out to get the final results. Hence, it is unclear how much of
the performance gain is due to quantum computation alone.
Verdict
Overall, the work on this use case underscores the importance of problem
modeling in unlocking the strengths of both classical and quantum solvers.
It provides a compelling case for D-Waves hybrid optimization workflows,
especially in domains where traditional methods struggle with scale or non-
linearity.
•Promising and Practically Viable – With Caveats: This use
case is well-suited for hybrid quantum-classical approaches. We demon-
strated that when the problem is modeled appropriately, e.g., as a bi-
nary quadratic program, D-Wave’s hybrid solver can handle large-scale
industrial problems (up to 150,000 variables) and deliver competitive
performance, even outperforming classical solvers modeled as a mixed-
integer linear program (MILP). This suggests that quantum comput-
ing is not just a theoretical possibility but practically viable for certain
classes of industrial optimization problems, especially when:
–The problem is non-linear or combinatorial.
–Classical solvers face scalability or performance bottlenecks.
–The problem can be reformulated into QUBO or BQP, which
aligns with quantum solver strengths.
•However, Quantum Benefit Is Conditional: The quantum advan-
tage is not universal. It depends heavily on:
–Modeling choices: Classical solvers excel with convex formula-
tions, while quantum solvers need binary/quadratic structures.
–Solver maturity: The study uses a hybrid solver, not a pure quan-
tum one, so the quantum contribution is blended with classical
resources.
–Hardware constraints: The current size of pure quantum hardware
does not allow addressing limitations like qubit count or noise,
which could affect generalizability, in scaling the problem sizes.
17

=== PAGE BREAK ===

•Recommendation: For organizations exploring quantum computing,
this use case provides a strong case for hybrid workflows. It is worth
investing in:
–Solver-aware problem modeling.
–Benchmarking hybrid solvers on real workloads.
–Collaborating with quantum vendors to tailor formulations.
3.2.2 Train Routing
In this use case we investigate the challenge of rescheduling and rerouting
trains (hereinafter referred to astrain routing) in a rail network after dis-
turbances such as equipment failures, environmental hazards, or unexpected
delays. Normally, rail schedules are tightly optimized to balance limited re-
sources like tracks and platforms. Once disruptions occur, additional delays
emerge as trains compete for these scarce resources. Traditional heuristics
and human-driven adjustments often yield workable solutions, but they lack
guarantees of optimality. This motivates the exploration of quantum opti-
mization techniques, which can exploit simultaneous state-space exploration
to identify globally optimal schedules in exponentially large search spaces.
The problem is formulated first as a MILP, which incorporates real-world
constraints such as minimal passing times, single-track exclusivity, station
capacities, and headway conditions between trains. Each train’s delay is
decomposed into primary (unavoidable) and secondary (avoidable) compo-
nents, and the optimization objective minimizes the sum of secondary delays
weighted by train priorities. Binary precedence variables govern the ordering
of trains in shared track segments and binary selection variables determines
the selection of track segments to route the trains, while constraints enforce
no early departure and minimal station stop requirements. Considering the
large scale and high complexity nature of the problem, decomposition tech-
niques have been explored to break the problem into smaller subproblems. In
particular, both Lagrangian relaxation and Benders decomposition have been
studied as potential approaches to improve computational efficiency. Specif-
ically, with Lagrangian relaxation, each subproblem solves the scheduling
and routing of a single train over the network. With Benders decomposition,
the delay of each station-train pairs is solved in a master problem, while all
the track level coordination, formulated as satisfiability problem, is solved in
18

=== PAGE BREAK ===

a subproblem. This significantly reduces the complexity and improves the
scalability.
A QUBO model is then derived to map the problem or subproblem after
the decomposition to quantum hardware. Classical solvers like CPLEX or
Gurobi can solve tiny cases in milliseconds and even larger cases below a
second. But for large problems as they exist in industry, classical solvers
struggle to find the optimum in few seconds, as it is required.
Figure 5: Microscopic illustration of a part of the Norwegian railway network.
The colored circles represent the positions of the trains. Visualization based
on data from [44].
Traffic-Light-based Evaluation
•Yellow Light
– Scalability: To encode the entire problem as a QUBO formula-
tion, the evaluation shows that the number of decision variables
scales quadratically with the number of trains and linearly with
the number of stations in the worst-case network. This results
in cubic scaling when both trains and stations increase, which is
19

=== PAGE BREAK ===

acceptable compared to other problems. The scaling matches clas-
sical MILP formulations, apart from a constant factor (which is
large). However, by applying Benders decomposition, a quantum
annealer was able to solve an instance involving 47 tracks, 6 sta-
tions and 6 trains using fewer than 240 qubits, while a gate-based
method (QAOA+) solved the same instance with fewer than 40
qubits. These results highlight the importance of proper problem
decomposition in making quantum approaches more scalable and
efficient.
– Transferability: This use case shares similarities with the sche-
duling and routing of AGV fleets with predefined paths. There-
fore, transferability to such use case can be considered in the future
research.
•Red Light
– Runtime: The rescheduling have to be done in seconds in indus-
try. This can be problematic for quantum computing, as there is
some overhead due to embedding and pre-/postprocessing steps.
Besides, the current results of gate-based quantum hardware takes
much longer than the classical computer, while quantum anneal-
ing is fast.
– Solution Quality: Using Benders decomposition, both quantum
annealing and gate-based (QAOA+) quantum computing meth-
ods successfully solve a problem instance involving 47 tracks and 6
trains.The gate-based model achieves solution quality close to op-
timal for those small instances, while the quantum annealer yields
solutions of lower quality than optimal.
– Model and Implementation: Current modeling of the use
case introduces simplifications such as neglecting the continuous
train dynamics, omitting the coordination of transfer options be-
tween trains, ignoring the cancellation of trains, and excluding
the scheduling of trains at depots. In reality, these factors would
introduce additional constraints that increase the complexity of
the problem. This further underscores the importance of employ-
ing proper decomposition techniques to extract a (sub-)problem
structure that is suitable for quantum computing.
20

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Verdict
•Current Limitation: Attempting to encode the entire problem as a
single QUBO formulation turns out to be less efficient and scalable.
Currently available hardware is not sufficient to handle real-world in-
stances. Even in the next 10 years, it is unlikely that a system with a
sufficiently large number of qubits to fit large real-world instances will
be available, given the current roadmaps of the hardware providers.
Even when in some point of time hardware is sufficient to embed the
problem, it remains to be shown whether the solutions are better than
those from classical algorithms. However, it must be emphasised that,
due to hardware limitations, only small problem instances can currently
be considered. Therefore, based on the investigations carried out, only
very limited conclusions can be drawn about future results.
•Encouraging Findings: Proper combination of decomposition tech-
nique and quantum algorithm is crucial to improve efficiency and scal-
ability. With Benders decomposition, the master problem only encodes
the delay of station-train pairs and mathematically equivalent to a set-
covering problem, which can be successfully solved by the gate-based
quantum algorithm QAOA+ while maintaining a quite low number of
Qubits. Its solution quality is comparable to that of classical solvers.
•Future Potential: The potential future benefit is high, especially
since quantum annealing is very fast and well-suited for real-time ad-
justments, given that the solution quality of quantum annealing will
be significantly improved and proper decomposition technique can be
developed.
•Recommendation: To improve scalability and efficiency, proper de-
composition is essential for solving train routing problems with quan-
tum computing. Combining Benders decomposition and Gate-based
methods like QAOA+ shows promising solution quality with minimal
Qubit usage, while quantum annealing offers solution speed but cur-
rently lower solution quality. Further research work in this direction is
recommended.
21

=== PAGE BREAK ===

3.2.3 Pod Coordination
The pod coordination problem (PCP) models a demand-responsive, door-to-
door transport system utilizing passive modular containers (pods) carried by
active vehicles such as trains or trucks. This problem falls under the cate-
gory of active-passive vehicle routing problems with multiple synchronization
constraints, necessitating tight coordination between pods and bases. The
PCP integrates elements of the dial-a-ride problem, the multi-depot vehi-
cle routing problem, heterogeneous fleets, and multiple modalities, aiming
to optimize service quality and operational efficiency. Currently, this use
case has not been implemented in a real-life setting, and the complexity of
the problem presents significant challenges for both classical and quantum
solvers.
Figure 6: The PCP combines vehicle routing, scheduling, and ordering prob-
lems. The goal is to provide an improved experience for users of public
transportation services while reducing the operation costs for providers. This
figure is adapted from [45]. Copyright©2025 Elsevier.
In this project, we explored various classical solution methods, includ-
ing mixed integer linear programming (MILP), adaptive large neighborhood
search, and iterative beam search. The problem’s complexity is highlighted
by the requirement for a substantial number of qubits; for instance, even the
22

=== PAGE BREAK ===

smallest test instances necessitate over 10,000 qubits, making them imprac-
tical for current quantum hardware.
Traffic-Light-based Evaluation
•Yellow Light
– Model and Implementation: The theoretical framework for
applying quantum computing to the PCP was successfully imple-
mented. However, the need for efficient handling of continuous
variables in the MILP formulation, which are required for the
synchronization constraints, poses a challenge for quantum com-
puting. Future developments in quantum algorithms that can
effectively address these variables will be crucial.
•Red Light
– Scalability: The number of qubits required even for the simplest
instances (over 10,000 for five customers) far exceeds the capa-
bilities of current quantum hardware. This presents a significant
barrier to practical implementation. However, due to these hard-
ware limitations, it is currently impossible to make any reliable
statements about scalability with future systems.
– Solution Quality: Due to the high qubit requirements, no tests
have been performed on quantum hardware. Classical problem-
tailored heuristics have demonstrated the ability to find high-
quality solutions quickly. This suggests that significant advances
in hardware and algorithms are required for quantum approaches
to offer a competitive advantage.
– Runtime: Due to its intrinsic complexity and high number of
hard constraints, embedding the PCP in a quantum circuit cur-
rently seems highly inefficient in terms of circuit depth, mapping
overhead, and consequently runtime. However, as no tests could
be performed on quantum hardware, the current investigations
have limited relevance to possible future developments.
– Transferability: Even though the PCP represents a rather gen-
eral problem class and is closely related to the vehicle routing
problem and – in its core – the traveling salesperson problem, its
23

=== PAGE BREAK ===

additional constraints and objectives make it hard to implement
on any quantum computer that relies on quantum circuits or a
QUBO formulation of the problem.
Verdict
Overall, the pod coordination use case highlights the significant challenges
that quantum computing faces in practical applications, particularly in the
realm of constraint-heavy optimization related vehicle routing problems.
•Limited Current Viability: The high qubit requirements and the
inability to conduct experiments on quantum hardware currently render
this use case impractical for quantum solutions. The classical methods
employed have proven effective, and the existing heuristics outperform
quantum approaches at this stage.
•Questionable Future Potential: Should advancements in quantum
hardware and algorithms occur, there may be potential for quantum
computing to provide benefits in this area. However, this is highly con-
ditional on overcoming the current limitations of qubit count and the
ability to handle hard constraints and continuous variables effectively.
•Recommendation: Organizations interested in exploring quantum
computing for problems related to the pod coordination use case should
consider to find models of their problem that rely on discrete variables
and fewer (hard) constraints. Otherwise, the PCP is currently not
expected to be among the first problem classes that provide a tangi-
ble benefit for the industry from advancements in quantum technology
within the foreseeable future.
3.2.4 Sensor Positioning
In the automotive industry, freshly produced vehicles need to be transported
from the end of the production line to the distribution area. With automated-
driving software on board of latest-generation vehicles this task can be done
without a human driver. One requirement for this is an environment that is
covered by infrastructure-based sensors. The positions of these sensors need
to be optimized, such that the covered area is maximized while the number
of sensors is minimized.
24

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Figure 7: An exemplary scenario with 38 possible sensor positions and 194
street points to cover in a setting inspired by a real-world production envi-
ronment.
Figure 8: The solution of the example scenario in Figure 7 is shown here. 12
sensors are placed on the 38 possible positions and all 194 street points are
covered.
25

=== PAGE BREAK ===

This task can be formulated as a combinatorial optimization problem,
typically represented using a QUBO formulation. In this formulation, binary
decision variables indicate whether a sensor is placed at a specific location
(1) or not (0). The objective function aims to maximize the total coverage
area while adhering to constraints related to sensor range and the number of
sensors available.
Key components of the formulation include coverage constraints, which
ensure that all critical areas are monitored by at least one sensor, and cost
considerations that account for installation, maintenance, and operational
expenses. Additionally, the model includes structural obstacles like columns
that can produce coverage shadows, ensuring that sensors can operate effec-
tively in the intended environment.
Hyperparameter optimization of the quantum annealing process includes
tuning encoding schemes, penalty factors, chain strengths, and annealing
time. Moreover, different decomposition strategies are evaluated, iteratively
dividing the model into smaller subproblems, which ensures feasible and scal-
able solutions for large-scale sensor positioning scenarios. Find more details
about this use case in the accompanying paper [46].
Traffic-Light-based Evaluation
•Green Light
– Transferability: The set cover QUBO model we formulated for
the sensor positioning use case efficiently identifies minimal cov-
erage solutions, a principle transferable to other domains like test
scenario selection for the simulation of driving situations or task-
based staffing and scheduling. Its ability to minimize resources
while ensuring full coverage makes it adaptable across various au-
tomotive and industrial applications requiring optimal coverage
with limited assets.
•Yellow Light
– Model and Implementation: The problem fits well into the set
cover and maximum independent set frameworks, which are sup-
ported by current quantum algorithms and hardware paradigms.
Variable counts in classical models are dominated by the sensor
26

=== PAGE BREAK ===

positions, while for quantum approaches, we need many slack vari-
ables for each constraint.
– Runtime: If quantum hardware continues to improve in qubit
count, coherence times, and error correction as expected, industry-
relevant instances could become solvable within this decade and
provide computation times comparable to classical methods ac-
cording to the test cases we evaluated in this study.
•Red Light
– Solution Quality: Experiments with quantum annealers have
produced solutions with low stability and suboptimal quality in-
ferior to classical solvers like Gurobi or heuristics like simulated
annealing.
– Scalability: For the QUBO formulation of the problem, the num-
ber of variables scales nearly cubically with the sensor and street
point density, implying that large instances with high-resolution
grids of possible sensor position and covered street points will re-
quire orders of magnitude more qubits than currently expected
available within the next years.
Verdict
The sensor positioning use case illustrates the current limitations of quan-
tum hardware in tackling large-scale, industry-relevant problems. While toy
instances with up to 60 qubits have been successfully solved, the solutions
are not yet competitive with classical methods in terms of solution quality
or stability.
•Limited Current Utility: Existing quantum annealing and other
quantum approaches are limited to small problem sizes, with solutions
often inferior to classical heuristics, and do not justify practical deploy-
ment at this stage.
•Scaling Prospects: The linear increase in the number of variables
with problem size is promising, suggesting that instances with thou-
sands of sensors could become solvable as hardware improves, possibly
in the next decade.
27

=== PAGE BREAK ===

•Future Outlook: With continued hardware scaling, error correction,
and improved embedding techniques, quantum methods could even-
tually provide cost-effective and optimal sensor placement solutions,
reducing infrastructure costs and increasing coverage efficiency.
•Recommendation: Organizations should monitor hardware develop-
ments and invest in problem modeling strategies that align with quan-
tum capabilities. Collaborations with hardware vendors and research
into scalable embeddings are advisable to prepare for future large-scale
applications.
3.2.5 Auto-Carrier Loading
The auto-carrier loading problem (ACLP) is an optimization challenge in the
automotive industry, particularly concerning the distribution of new vehicles.
While trains are the preferred mode for overland transport, manufacturers
often resort to road transport via auto carriers due to flexibility or the un-
availability of rail networks. Auto carriers are specialized trucks equipped
with flexible loading platforms, and determining the optimal configuration
of these platforms is complex due to the varying sizes, shapes, and weights
of passenger vehicles.
Typically, a truck and its trailer can carry up to ten vehicles at a time.
The vehicles can be arranged on platforms that can be individually angled or
combined to maximize space utilization. Additionally, vehicles can be placed
either forward or backward to further optimize the load. Constraints related
to weight, height, and length must be adhered to for both the truck and
trailer, as well as the total load.
In theory, the solution space for the ACLP scales exponentially with the
number of vehicles, leading to a vast number of possible arrangements [47].
However, the objective is highly discretized, meaning that while many ar-
rangements may meet the requirements, identifying an optimal solution can
be relatively straightforward due to the potential for simple heuristics or
human decision-making to yield satisfactory results.
In this project, we explore various classical solution methods, including
simulated annealing and CPLEX [48], a commercial optimization software,
alongside the D-Wave quantum annealer [20]. The complexity of the problem
is highlighted by the requirement for a substantial number of variables; for
instance, toy problems have been investigated with a pool of up to 18 cars
28

=== PAGE BREAK ===

placed on up to six platforms, leading to QUBO matrices with up to 1000
variables. However, the currently available quantum hardware is insufficient
to solve industry-scale problem instances.
Figure 9: Example solution for loading seven vehicles on a truck and a trailer.
Traffic-Light-based Evaluation
•Green Light
– Model and ImplementationThe theoretical framework for ap-
plying quantum computing to the ACLP exists. If hardware lim-
itations are overcome, quantum methods could potentially op-
timize complex loading problems more effectively than classical
methods.
•Yellow Light
– Scalability & Runtime: The problem scales linearly with the
number of cars. This holds for classical MILP formulations as
well as for QUBO formulations, which makes quantum computing
promising. However, the problem has a lot of constraints, some
of them of fourth order. This leads to many slack variables in
the QUBO formulation, which means that the number of vari-
ables for quantum computing is higher by a constant but large
factor. The currently available quantum hardware is not suffi-
cient to solve industry-scale problem instances and it remains to
be seen if quantum methods can compete with runtimes achieved
with classical heuristics that produce sufficient solution qualities.
– Solution Quality: The D-Wave quantum annealer has provided
results for small problem instances comparable to solutions found
with classical heuristics like simulated annealing, indicating that
29

=== PAGE BREAK ===

the solution quality could also be competitive for larger problem
sizes once quantum hardware matures.
– Transferability: If advancements in quantum hardware occur,
there may be potential for quantum computing to optimize en-
tire fleets of trucks at a level of detail currently only possible for
individual auto carriers.
Verdict
The question if there is a clear path to quantum advantage in the ACLP
within the near future is delicate. The implications would be significant for
related problems in logistics in the automotive sector and beyond.
•Encouraging Findings: Empirical observations suggest that the num-
ber of model variables increases linearly with the number of cars in-
cluded in the problem. This linear relationship implies that problems
involving up to 100 cars and 10 trucks could potentially be addressed
with approximately 100,000 noisy qubits, meaning real-world-related
problem sizes could be solved with quantum devices within a matter of
years.
•Limited Potential for Improvement: While the D-Wave quantum
annealer has been able to solve small problem instances, the results ob-
tained were not significantly better than those achieved through classi-
cal heuristic solutions. This indicates that it might be hard for quantum
computing to provide a competitive advantage for this specific appli-
cation due to the relatively good performance of classical methods.
•Recommendation: Until quantum hardware is mature and provides
the necessary qubit counts to solve large-scale problems, industries that
rely on efficient logistics and face challenges similar to the ACLP should
explore the integration of quantum solutions into existing logistics sys-
tems. This would accelerate the transition to improved decision-making
processes that have a huge scaling potential due to the high number
of vehicles and trucks involved in the logistic frameworks of globally
acting manufacturers.
30

=== PAGE BREAK ===

3.2.6 Modular Production Logistics
In this use case we study a complex industrial scheduling problem involv-
ing autonomous guided vehicles (AGVs) in a modular logistics setting, and
present a comparative study of quantum-classical and classical optimization
methods. Figure 10 shows an illustration of a small process involving different
jobs and AGVs.
Figure 10: A schematic diagram of problem instance with two AGVs, total
2 jobs and 3 machines. The transportation of any job from one machine to
another is carried out by an AGV.
The use case arises at several filling floors at BASF, where pallets are
filled with different products and are then wrapped for shipping. In this
project, we evaluate how different modeling approaches affect solver per-
formance and to explore whether quantum-classical metaheuristics can offer
practical advantages over traditional methods.
Two distinct mathematical models are developed for the same scheduling
problem. The first is a time-indexed MILP, which is well-suited for classi-
cal mathematical programming solvers. The second is a binary optimization
model with both linear and quadratic constraints and a linear objective func-
tion, designed to be compatible with quantum-classical metaheuristics. This
dual-modeling approach allows us to assess solver performance not just across
technologies, but also across formulations tailored to each solver’s strengths.
31

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Our study finds that modeling choices significantly influence optimiza-
tion outcomes. Classical solvers perform well with the MILP formulation,
while the quantum-classical metaheuristic shows strong results with the bi-
nary quadratic model. This highlights the importance of aligning problem
structure with solver capabilities. The quantum-classical approach, in partic-
ular, benefits from the novel modeling technique, suggesting that quantum-
inspired methods can be competitive in real-world industrial contexts when
the problem is appropriately framed.
Overall, the results obtained using classical computing are far better than
quantum computing. However, this use case provides a compelling evidence
that quantum-classical metaheuristics are a viable tool for industrial schedul-
ing, especially when traditional solvers face limitations mainly due to ill-
modeled mathematical formulations of the optimization problem. It thus
reinforces the broader insight that solver-aware modeling is essential to un-
lock the full potential of any computational paradigm, classical or quantum.
Traffic-Light-based Evaluation
•Yellow Light
– Model and Implementation:The quantum-classical metaheu-
ristic solver performs well when the problem is modeled as a binary
optimization problem with quadratic constraints. This formula-
tion aligns with the strengths of hybrid classical-quantum solvers,
allowing them to deliver competitive results. However, this benefit
is not inherent to quantum computing—it is highly dependent on
the modeling strategy. The classical solver, using a time-indexed
MILP formulation, outperform the hybrid solvers. This shows
that quantum benefit is conditional, and solver performance is
tightly coupled to how the problem is framed.
– Scalability:The quantum-classical solver used is a metaheuris-
tic, which means it does not guarantee optimality. While it shows
promising results, its performance is instance-specific and may
vary depending on the complexity and constraints of the schedul-
ing task. This limits its predictability and reliability in broader
applications without further tuning.
– Solution Quality:The D-Wave hybrid solver produced feasible
solutions for the scheduling problem, but the solution quality was
32

=== PAGE BREAK ===

noticeably lower than that achieved by state-of-the-art classical
solvers like Gurobi. However, the results are far from negligi-
ble—they demonstrate that hybrid quantum solvers can tackle
complex optimization tasks and provide a foundation for future
improvements.
•Red Light
– Transferability:While the results are promising for the specific
AGV scheduling use case, there is limited evidence of generalis-
ability. It remains uncertain whether a quantum-classical benefits
would be observed in other logistics optimization problem without
comparable modeling adaptations.
– Runtime: The hybrid solver achieved feasible solutions for the
scheduling problem but generally required longer total runtimes
than Gurobi. While Gurobi consistently solved instances to near-
optimality within seconds or minutes, the hybrid approach showed
higher variability in runtime, sometimes taking several minutes for
complex cases.
–No Pure Quantum Solution: Due to proprietary nature of D-
Waves hybrid solvers, we could not assess the actual effect of
quantum computing alone, so it’s unclear how much of the perfor-
mance gain is attributable to quantum computation versus classi-
cal heuristics embedded in the hybrid solver. This makes it diffi-
cult to assess or quantify for a true quantum advantage. Addition-
ally, the size of the hardware restricts us to address hardware con-
straints such as qubit count, connectivity, or noise—factors that
are critical in assessing the scalability and feasibility of quantum
solutions in real-world settings.
Verdict
•Quantum-Classical Optimization Is Promising: Binary formula-
tions with quadratic constraints allow hybrid solvers to perform com-
petitively, showing that quantum-inspired methods can be applied to
real-world industrial challenges, especially when problems are modeled
to suit quantum paradigms.
33

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Quantum Advantage Is Conditional and Model-dependent:
Classical solvers using time-indexed MILP outperform hybrids when
the problem structure leads to linear or convex formulations. Bench-
marking against pure quantum solvers was not feasible due to hardware
limitations.
•Quantum-Classical Approaches Are Complementary to Clas-
sical Methods: While effective in certain scenarios, they are not re-
placements. Classical solvers remain robust and reliable, particularly
when the problem structure aligns with their strengths, and quantum
benefits are not yet broadly validated.
In summary, the work on this use case shows that quantum-classical meta-
heuristics can be effective for industrial scheduling – but the quantum benefit
is conditional, modeling-dependent, and not yet broadly validated. Classical
solvers remain robust and reliable, especially when the problem structure
suits their strengths.
•Recommendation: For organizations exploring quantum computing,
this use case provides a strong case for hybrid workflows. It’s worth
investing in:
–Invest in solver-aware modeling frameworks: The study shows
that quantum-classical solvers perform well when the problem is
modeled as a binary optimization problem with quadratic con-
straints. Future efforts should focus on developing automated or
semi-automated modeling pipelines that can translate industrial
scheduling problems into quantum-suitable formats like QUBO or
BQP. This will reduce the manual effort and expertise required to
unlock quantum benefits.
–Benchmark against pure quantum solvers: To better understand
the true quantum contribution, future work should include com-
parative benchmarks with pure quantum solvers (e.g., gate-based
systems or annealers without classical augmentation). This will
help isolate quantum performance and guide decisions on when
hybrid vs. pure quantum approaches are most appropriate.
–Explore generalizability cross logistics domains: The current study
focuses on AGV scheduling in modular logistics. Future research
34

=== PAGE BREAK ===

should test quantum-classical metaheuristics on other logistics
problems—such as warehouse routing, supply chain optimization,
or multi-modal transport planning—to assess how broadly the
modeling and solver strategies apply.
–Integrate hardware-aware constraints: Quantum hardware limita-
tions (e.g., qubit count, connectivity, noise) are not addressed as
the hardware size is extremely restrictive for this use case. Fu-
ture implementations should incorporate hardware-aware model-
ing and scheduling, ensuring that problem instances are tailored
to the capabilities of available quantum devices. This will improve
feasibility and performance in real deployments.
3.2.7 Cooling System Optimization
The Cooling System Optimization problem addresses the challenge of design-
ing an optimal architecture for mechatronic systems composed of different
components (e.g., batteries, engines, coolers, pumps). The task involves de-
ciding which components should be included and how they should be inter-
connected under given operational conditions and constraints (e.g., weight,
cost, or thermal limits). Evaluating system performance requires simulating
the physical behavior of the components, which is modeled by (differential)
equations. The problem combines elements of optimization and simulation
and falls into the academic area of Optimization of Dynamic Systems (closely
related to Optimal Control). The industrial goal is to balance system per-
formance with cost and efficiency in a way that is computationally tractable.
The system is defined by a set of differential equations which can be linearized
into a linear system of equations. The connections between the components
are represented by binary variables which signal if a component is connected
or not. These can be integrated into the linear system by multiplying the
relevant equation with the corresponding decision variable (i.e. connection).
Optimal solutions then are represented by the minimal assignment of the
connection variables that optimizes a certain metric (e.g., the temperature
in one or multiple components).
The test instances scale from minimal setups (four components and six
possible connections) to industrially relevant cases with around ten com-
ponents under fifty operating conditions. Classical methods currently rely
on genetic algorithms combined with explicit integration schemes, with run-
times extending to several hours for larger cases. For the quantum approach,
35

=== PAGE BREAK ===

engine
pump
coolercooler
battery
(a) (b)
Figure 11: Simple example of a cooling system and its mathematical abstrac-
tion into a linear system.
the use case explores the Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm
(QAOA) for optimization, alongside Quantum Singular Value Transforma-
tion (QSVT) for simulation. Since the circuit depth of QSVT is prohibitive
for current NISQ devices the approach was simulated only and not tested
on actual quantum hardware. More information can be found in the paper
detailing the implementation and evaluation [49].
Traffic-Light-based Evaluation
•Green Light
– Transferability: The approach could be extended to other use
cases where linear systems form the core simulation step (e.g., unit
commitment or topology optimization).
•Yellow Light
– Solution Quality: Given sufficient resources the algorithm was
able to find the optimal solution for very small systems. Larger
systems could not be simulated due to the complexity of the algo-
rithm so the effectiveness of QAOA remains to be tested. Using
Grover would render an algorithm with provable effectiveness.
•Red Light
– Scalability: For the optimization each possible connection is rep-
resented by a qubit. In the worst case (all-to-all connectivity) he
36

=== PAGE BREAK ===

number of connections scales quadratically with the number of
components. Current NISQ devices cannot support QSVT due to
noise and circuit depth; logical qubits on fault-tolerant machines
are required.
– Runtime: The actual extent of runtime advantage achievable
depends on an efficient encoding of the system (i.e. matrix and
solution vector) and is not demonstrated for general realistic sce-
narios.
– Model and Implementation: Modeling the use case as a linear
system limits the complexity of the dynamical system to systems
without non-linear elements which is not sufficient for industrial
problems.
Verdict
The cooling system optimization case is assessed as Red in the traffic-light
evaluation.
•Open Challenges: Although the theoretical potential for runtime
speedups is significant—particularly in solving linear systems—the ap-
proach is currently limited by both hardware readiness and algorithmic
barriers. The restriction to linear systems limits the usefulness of the
approach for the specific use case of optimizing dynamical systems. In
general an efficient encoding of the system matrix is not given and re-
duces any potential speedup. This represents a challenge independent
of the current hardware capabilities. As the approach utilizes fault-
tolerant algorithms hardware limitations however still negate current
applicability.
•Transferable Findings: The applicability to problems defined by
linear systems holds great value in many other use cases, especially in
solving numerical simulations of physical quantities which have an ef-
ficient classical approach (e.g., Finite-Element Method, Finite Volume
Method, etc.) to discretizing the problem into linear systems. Further
utilizing the result from a quantum linear system solver within an op-
timization algorithm like QAOA or Grover, can remove the bottleneck
of reading out the full state vector and making use of solving the linear
system in superposition.
37

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Figure 12: Photo of a physical realization of a cart pole.
•Recommendation: Continued exploration is justified, especially in
contexts where linear formulations are natural, but breakthroughs in
both algorithm design and hardware capabilities are prerequisites for
industrial deployment. Especially an efficient way to improve the scal-
ing of the condition number (influencing the complexity of QSVT) and
an efficient encoding are important challenges to overcome.
3.3 Machine Learning Use Cases
3.3.1 Cart Pole Quantum Twin
The Cart Pole Quantum Twin problem is based on the well-known cart-pole
or inverted pendulum benchmark from control engineering. While the sys-
tem is very low-dimensional (four variables), it is nonlinear and non-trivial,
making it a representative case for general control tasks. In this project,
the cart-pole serves as a proxy for more complex industrial control problems
(e.g., gas turbine control with hundreds or thousands of sensors), while re-
maining small enough to be simulated on today’s quantum simulators. The
use case was investigated with quantum machine learning approaches and
explores whether quantum-enhanced training methods can provide benefits
over classical approaches in designing control policies.
The toy instance can be represented using four qubits, while realistic in-
dustrial benchmarks (e.g., the industrial benchmark by Hein et al. 2017)
would likely require 30–50 qubits. The key performance criterion is solution
quality, with secondary attention to computation time. In practice, quan-
tum solutions achieved nearly comparable quality to classical methods, but
were 10–100 times slower. Classical baselines included neural networks opti-
mized with particle swarm optimization. On the quantum side, experiments
38

=== PAGE BREAK ===

used variational quantum circuits (VQCs), quantum long short-term mem-
ory (LSTM), and quantum–particle swarm hybrids. All implementations
were conducted on simulators via Qiskit, with no results on actual quantum
hardware.
The proof-of-concept confirmed that the approach works on toy problems
but did not extend beyond them. The main advantage anticipated for quan-
tum approaches lies in their ability to explore the solution space without
relying on gradients and without being trapped in local minima. Current
NISQ hardware is insufficient due to noise and depth limitations, but the
path forward involves scaling to noiseless 30–50 qubit systems with circuit
depths of around 20 VQC layers for simulation and thousands for optimiza-
tion. The expectation is that future fault-tolerant devices will be required
for meaningful industrial-scale experiments. No major unforeseen blockers
were encountered during implementation. For further details the use case
and experiments are published in [50].
Traffic-Light-based Evaluation
•Green Light
– Solution Quality: Simulations show comparable results com-
pared to classical machine learning methods — better quantum
hardware should enable larger and more realistic benchmarks.
– Transferability: Transfer opportunities exist for real-world con-
trol problems such as plasma stabilization in fusion reactors, wind
turbine regulation, design optimization, and even drug discovery.
•Yellow Light
– Scalability: It is not yet known how well quantum methods will
scale to more realistic benchmarks beyond toy models, nor what
requirements are posed on coherence time and noise to facilitate
training on actual quantum hardware.
– Model and Implementation: Quantum machine learning mod-
els are similarly applicable compared to classical machine learning
models and featured comparable performance for small instances.
Scalability to larger instances still needs to be proven on larger
hardware.
39

=== PAGE BREAK ===

•Red Light
– Runtime: Current quantum simulations are significantly slower
(10–100x) than classical methods. Without speedups, practical
relevance remains limited.
Verdict
The Cart Pole Quantum Twin is assessed as Green in the traffic-light eval-
uation. The path to demonstrating potential quantum advantage appears
clearer than for many other use cases, as the problem is well defined, scal-
able in principle, and closely linked to industrial relevance.
•Reliance on Future Hardware: Meaningful results depend entirely
on future advances in fault-tolerant quantum hardware due to require-
ments on circuits with more layers than current hardware can handle
without accumulating to many errors.
•Optimistic Outlook and Applicability: The main appeal lies in
the possibility of optimization of quantum circuits to avoid local min-
ima and explore larger solution spaces, potentially yielding better-than-
classical controllers. Transfer potential is broad, suggesting this line of
research could eventually support high-impact industrial applications
once sufficient hardware capabilities are available.
•Recommendation: Closely monitor hardware developments and test
problem instances with higher complexity on improved quantum pro-
cessors.
3.3.2 Contextual Bandit
The Contextual Bandit problem involves identifying an optimal decision in a
high-dimensional space where the best action depends on external contextual
information, which itself may also be high-dimensional. This problem often
arises in optimal control of industrial machines and systems. Deciding on
the best control input depends on many external variables (in complex cases
hundreds or more) and thus finding the best option that maximizes a certain
goal is non-trivial. In machine learning, this is referred to as the continuous
action contextual bandit problem. For this project, the Industrial Benchmark
[51] was used as a representative environment, designed to capture realistic
40

=== PAGE BREAK ===

aspects of industrial control scenarios. In this framing, optimization requires
searching over control variables while keeping them fixed, and then measuring
system performance in response. This use case falls under machine learning
and aims to assess whether quantum approaches can improve search efficiency
in large, complex spaces.
The initial experiments were conducted on toy instances modeled with
five qubits. Classical baselines used neural networks, while quantum vari-
ants were implemented using variational quantum circuits (VQCs) with Ten-
sorFlow Quantum. While practical limitations concerning computational
resources and existing hardware persist, the robust generalization perfor-
mance of VQCs, combined with rapid progress in quantum technologies,
highlights their potential for industrial optimization tasks, particularly in
high-dimensional settings and underscores the need for further exploration
within quantum machine learning. For industry-scale problems, the number
of required qubits and performance characteristics remain unknown.
The experiments demonstrated that the contextual bandit formulation
can be mapped to a small quantum system but did not extend beyond the toy
case. No runs were performed on real hardware; instead, classical worksta-
tions were used to simulate quantum circuits. While the potential of quantum
contextual bandit solvers is high—especially in domains where exhaustive ex-
ploration of vast solution spaces is required—the practical challenges remain
unresolved. These include how to handle large data volumes, what is the best
ansatz for a specific problem, and how to integrate a quantum circuit based
bandit into real-world workflows. More details on the benchmark problem
and performed investigations can be taken from [52]
Traffic-Light-based Evaluation
•Green Light
– Transferability: Contextual bandits underpin numerous appli-
cations, from recommendation systems and online advertising to
clinical decision support, robotics, and financial optimization.
•Yellow Light
– Solution Quality: The quality of the solutions from the quantum
circuits show competitive performance and even feature a better
generalization compared to classical models.
41

=== PAGE BREAK ===

•Red Light
– Runtime: Industrial instances of the contextual bandit often
have real-time constraints which pose challenges on the integra-
tion of quantum hardware into workflows. Current quantum sim-
ulations are significantly slower (10–100x) than classical methods.
Without speedups, practical relevance remains limited.
– Scalability: The quantum resource requirements for real-world
contextual bandit problems are not yet quantified, leaving uncer-
tainty about whether practical quantum advantage is attainable.
– Model and Implementation: Efficient encodings of real-world
data are not known for general cases.
Verdict
The Contextual Bandit use case is assessed as Amber in the overall traffic-
light evaluation.
•Reliance on Future Hardware: On current hardware no usable
solutions could be generated and thus future hardware has to improve
to yield comparable results to the performed simulations.
•Applicability: Theoretical impact is high — given the ubiquity of con-
textual bandits across industries — but practical application requires
both better hardware and new modeling strategies.
•Recommendation: Expanding tests beyond toy problems by increas-
ing context dimensionality and means for efficiently encoding real-world
data.
3.3.3 Forecasting
Forecasting timeseries is a very important topic in many areas, such as fi-
nance, logistics (e.g., commodity price forecasting) or other areas like weather
prediction.
We considered one-dimensional time series with equally spaced time steps,
where the task was to predict the next values based on a look-back window
of the lastntime steps. As a starting point, we predicted simple functions
42

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Figure 13: A conceptual visualization of time-series forecasting.
such as sine waves or repeating values. For benchmarking stock data from
Apple and Sales data from a pasta brand were used.
Many different models were compared. On the classical side, an LSTM,
ARIMA and a basic method that just takes the last value as a prediction
for the next value. As quantum models, three versions of a quantum neural
network, a quantum deep Boltzmann machine (QDBM), quantum reservoir
computing and a quantum LSTM were developed. All quantum models were
run on a simulator several times to get stable results. To make this possible,
Quriosity, BASF’s high-performance computing cluster, was used to handle
this resource-intensive task.
On Apple stock data, the simple last value prediction was the best model
across all quantum and classical models, suggesting that this time series is
essentially a random walk. On pasta sales data, the LSTM has the best
performance, followed by the QNN.
The QDBM had large variations on different hyperparameter and on
weight initialization. This can be seen as a weakness of the model or an
opportunity to find better settings for future work. Also for other models,
hyperparameter optimization had often a greater impact than the difference
between the models.
43

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Traffic-Light-based Evaluation
•Green Light
– Scalability: Quantum models need one qubit for each timestep
in the look-back window. Thus already full experiments could run
on today’s hardware: Quantum deep Boltzmann machines can be
run on D-Wave’s quantum annealers, which enables already larger
networks, up to several thousand qubits on real hardware today.
– Runtime & Model and Implementation: Quantum reservoir
computing does not need training. After running a given amount
of samples, the fitting process happens classically, which makes it
highly suitable for early NISQ devices.
–Hybrid Methods: Hybrid networks with a quantum and a classi-
cal part can be implemented easily to gain advantages from both
worlds in one model.
•Yellow Light
– Solution Quality: The quantum models could achieve a com-
parable performance to the classical models. However, there is
currently no clear sign of a possible advantage for any quantum
model compared to a classical one.
–Dimensionality: Most real-world datasets have multiple dimen-
sions, which cannot be evaluated on real hardware with a suffi-
ciently large look-back window today.
•Red Light
– Transferability: Stock data is close to being a random walk,
which means it cannot be predicted. This theory is supported by
the fact, that the last-value method outperformed all models on
this dataset, including the classical models, during our evaluation.
Thus achieving results similar to classical models does not provide
meaningful insights.
Verdict
•Current Viability: The currently available hardware is sufficient for
this simple example of a one-dimensional timeseries with a small look-
44

=== PAGE BREAK ===

back window. However, hardware access is costly, making full train-
ing with hundreds of epochs impractical. Most real-world applications
would involve multiple dimensions, which are difficult to fit on real
hardware.
•Future Potential: The future potential is high as this use case has
many applications in different areas. At the same time machine learning
is a black box and it is difficult to find general theoretical advantages.
•Recommendation: Keep in mind, that quantum machine learning is
a viable tool for time series forecasting in the future. It can be seen
as a new tool in the toolset of every machine learning expert and it
is already useful for datasets with one dimension and when a small
lookback window is sufficient. In 5 to 10 years it can be advanced to
more complex examples.
3.3.4 Multi-criteria Optimization
Multi-criteria optimization aims to find the best combination of different
input features to achieve desired values for the output features. This can
be visualized as a Pareto front, where we get a multidimensional surface
displaying the best input combinations.
In this use case, we investigated a machine learning surrogate model de-
signed to approximate the underlying relationship between inputs and out-
puts. This is very helpful if the experiments to get one datapoint are very
expensive and fewer experiments are needed to get a good approximation of
the efficient frontier.
The machine learning model used was a standard regression model in
supervised learning. For classical comparison, random forest and a multi-
layer perceptron are used. In addition, we built a quantum deep neural
network composed of a feature map and an ansatz layer, forming a full layer.
Data reuploading and trainable feature maps increased the expressive power
of the model.
We tested the model on a synthetic dataset consisting of the functions
perm,rosenbrock,rastrigin, andschwefel, which were combined into a multi-
output function, requiring 4 qubits. For real-world applications we used a
paint dataset provided by BASF, requiring 15 qubits for the 15 input features.
45

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Figure 14: A conceptual visualization of multi-criteria optimization.
Traffic-Light-based Evaluation
•Green Light
– Scalability: The quantum model was trained on a simulator, and
predictions were made on IonQ’s quantum gate-based computer.
The results on real hardware were similar to the ones on the simu-
lator when few layers were used. This suggests that larger models
could also be trained and run once hardware becomes more af-
fordable and less noisy.
– Transferability: This use case is a standard supervised learning
task, namely regression via surrogate modeling to approximate an
unknown function and predict new data points for multi-criterial
optimization. As regression is among the most common ML tasks,
the approach is widely transferable, though in quantum machine
learning very high-dimensional inputs may exceed qubit resources
and limit applicability.
•Yellow Light
– Solution Quality: The quantum model achieved results compa-
rable to the classical machine learning models. While the classical
46

=== PAGE BREAK ===

models performed slightly better, the difference was not substan-
tial. It should be noted, however, that the classical baseline mod-
els were not fine-tuned, whereas the quantum models underwent
extensive tuning. Thus, the performance of the classical models
may be somewhat underestimated in this comparison.
– Model and Implementation: Barren plateaus are a complex
issue similar to vanishing gradient problems in classical machine
learning. There is no solution for it now and it might limit quan-
tum machine learning, especially as this problem increases with
larger circuits.
– Runtime: Training on a simulator is very slow and only small cir-
cuits are feasible right now. Real hardware is very expensive and
a full training cycle of several thousand epochs would cost around
1 million euros right now on ion-based quantum computers.
Verdict
•Current Viability: There is already hardware available to test spe-
cific use cases like the paint data on real hardware. However, limited
reliability and uptime of current hardware remain significant barriers
for consistent practical use. Future improvements in noise reduction
would enable the use of deeper circuits and more qubits for complex
tasks.
•Future Potential: This use case is highly relevant, as it is a common
regression task with supervised learning and covers most machine learn-
ing tasks out there today. As hardware matures and larger datasets like
images and text can be processed by quantum machine learning it has
great potential to show advantages over classical machine learning at
least in some areas. For industry, this could translate into substantial
impact on product design.
•Recommendation: The most important task now is to investigate
more into different ways how to set up the circuit and how to use ma-
chine learning techniques to prevent barren plateaus and to avoid local
optima. It can already be used for datasets with few datapoints and
low dimensions. As soon as the hardware matures it can be very inter-
esting for a wide range of machine learning tasks. In parallel, careful
47

=== PAGE BREAK ===

benchmarking against well-tuned classical baselines will be essential to
identify genuine advantages.
3.4 Evaluation Overview of Considered Use Cases
The industry applications evaluated during the project can broadly be cate-
gorized into three categories. An overview of the evaluation of all use cases
is presented in Table 1.
The use cases best aligned with current quantum hardware and algo-
rithms show comparable results to classical approaches for small test prob-
lem instances. For these, existing algorithms could already provide benefits
compared to or in synergy with classical algorithms.
Production assignment and schedulingis promising and practically vi-
able in hybrid form, though quantum benefit is conditional on modeling and
hardware, with limitations arising from the need to reformulate into binary
quadratic form. Industrial relevance for instances with hundreds of thousand
of qubits is already in the vicinity of hybrid solvers and estimated for around
2030 for pure quantum approaches according to roadmaps for quantum an-
nealers and gate based devices.
Forecastingof time series is feasible and shows comparable solution qual-
ities to classical machine learning models in simple one-dimensional setups
and has potential for more complex cases. However, it currently shows no
clear advantage and lacks demonstrated scalability to multidimensional data.
It is estimated that it could show industrial relevance within five to ten years
once quantum hardware facilitates deeper circuits for tens to hundreds of
logical qubits.
Thecart pole quantum twinis conceptually strong with broad transfer-
ability, though its scalability beyond toy models remains unproven and cur-
rent implementations are much slower than classical ones. Similar to the
forecasting use case, hardware needs to mature so that the number of layers
can be increased for tens to hundreds of qubits.
Auto-carrier loadingis not yet competitive with classical heuristics, lim-
ited by inferior runtime and solution quality despite favorable scaling char-
acteristics. For larger instances (e.g., fleet-level optimization) it could show
benefits with larger and less error-prone future hardware. Industrial rele-
vance could arise around 2030 according to current roadmaps judging on
the requirement of hundreds of thousands of qubits for industrial relevant
problems.
48

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Multi-criteria optimizationis viable for small datasets but limited by
barren plateaus and heavy fine-tuning, which render scalability uncertain.
Given hardware matures to support more layers which can be trained without
the problem of barren plateaus we could envision a relevance for industrial
problems in the early 2030s.
Overall, these use cases are limited less by modeling or algorithmic gaps
and more by current qubit counts, noise, and circuit depth, with industrial
relevance expected around or after 2030, ranging from early applicability in
hybrid approaches to the need for deeper, less error-prone circuits.
The second category also features quantum algorithms that can tackle the
full problem in a sufficient manner. However, it can already be estimated
that for industrial relevant problem sizes the complexity increases strongly,
rendering quantum approaches with the current technology infeasible.
Modular production logisticsshows conditional promise for hybrid solvers,
but the advantage is highly dependent on specific formulations while classi-
cal MILPs remain stronger for generic problems. Quantum hardware after
2030 could support solving industrial relevant problems which would require
hundreds of thousand of qubits but current experiments show lower solution
quality compared to classical solvers.
In thesensor positioninguse case, quantum methods are currently inferior
to classical methods, mainly due to inflated qubit requirements from slack
variables and poor stability of solutions. While the problem fits naturally
into QUBO form, modeling inefficiencies severely limits scalability, and the
solution quality lags behind classical solvers. This use case could become
attractive for large-scale sensor grids only after 2035, as current roadmaps
do not predict qubit counts and improved error correction to handle the
inflated problem sizes until then.
Similarly, thecooling system optimizationuse case is interesting for lin-
earizable problems only. Such problems, however, are ample in the engi-
neering domain. The quantum approach is inferior to classical alternatives
until general systems (represented by the matrix and vector of the linear
system) can be encoded efficiently. While runtime and scaling advantages
for general cases remain purely theoretical under certain constraints (e.g., if
all possible solutions need to be evaluated) the developed algorithm could
present a runtime benefit which needs to be proven on future hardware that
supports running the full algorithm for small instances which we estimate to
be available not before 2035.
Finally, three use cases are challenged by insufficient modeling to facilitate
49

=== PAGE BREAK ===

the solution of full industrial problems on quantum hardware. Thecontextual
bandithas high theoretical impact but depends critically on solving open
challenges in encoding and circuit efficiency; its limitation lies in the absence
of general, efficient encodings for realistic data and simulations that are far
slower than classical methods. Industrial relevance is unclear due to the open
challenges and thus contingent on scalable encodings.
Train routingshows promise through decomposition, but current mod-
els omit key real-world constraints and large instances remain intractable,
making it clear that more effective modeling and algorithmic strategies are
required. Similar to the contextual bandit, without being able to model the
full set of constraints the industrial relevance remains unclear.
Pod coordinationis currently impractical due to the absence of modeling
approaches that can incorporate continuous variables and the extreme qubit
demand, exceeding 10,000 even for toy cases. These use cases face primary
barriers in algorithmic innovation as well as hardware availability, with in-
dustrial relevance unclear or far-distant. Future developments in quantum
algorithms and modeling will show if these use cases can benefit of quantum
computing in the future.
50

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Use
Case
Run-
time
Scala-
bility
Model &
Impl.
Solution
Quality
Transfer-
ability
Forecast-
ing Green Green Green Yellow Red
Production
Assignment &
Scheduling
Green Green Yellow Yellow Red
Cart Pole
Quantum Twin Red Yellow Yellow Green Green
Auto-Carrier
Loading Yellow Yellow Green Yellow Yellow
Multi-criteria
Optimization Yellow Green Yellow Yellow Green
Modular
Production
Logistics
Red Yellow Yellow Yellow Red
Sensor
Positioning Yellow Red Yellow Red Green
Cooling
System
Optimization
Red Red Red Yellow Green
Contextual
Bandit Red Red Red Yellow Green
Train
Routing Red Yellow Red Red Yellow
Pod
Coordination Red Red Yellow Red Red
Table 1: Overview of use cases evaluated in this work, separated in three
categories from more to less optimistic about current and future quantum
computing performance compared to classical methods.
51

=== PAGE BREAK ===

4 Recommendations for the Industry and
Stakeholders of the Quantum Ecosystem
Based on the use-case analyses and insights from this study, several recom-
mendations can be derived for industry stakeholders, quantum technology
providers, and the broader ecosystem. These recommendations span short-,
mid-, and long-term perspectives, highlighting both practical actions and
strategic directions for collaboration and innovation.
1. In the short term, no clear benefits from pure quantum devices should
be expected. The utility of hybrid devices should be investigated and
thoroughly benchmarked against purely classical solutions, especially
for optimization use cases that can be naturally mapped to QUBO
formulations and do not suffer from significant overhead due to the
requirement of slack variables. The evaluated use cases – production
assignment and scheduling, modular production logistics, and auto-
carrier loading – can serve as good reference problems.
2. Quantum machine learning use cases that show results comparable to
classical machine learning approaches should be continuously tested on
improved hardware to determine if they scale similarly to their classi-
cal counterparts. Runtime and cost of solution remain important fac-
tors that require consideration and improvement. Joint investigations
with hardware providers to optimize these metrics are recommended
as valuable efforts. Reference examples from the investigated use case
list include forecasting, the cart pole quantum twin, and multi-criteria
optimization.
3. Benefits for use cases in the second category depend on improvements
in modeling and more efficient encoding. Research in these areas should
be industrially motivated, with collaborations between industry, aca-
demia, algorithm developers, and hardware providers to develop opti-
mized mappings and algorithms tailored to specific industrial use cases
and hardware modalities. Several investigated use cases in this project
fall into this category. The sensor positioning problem requires a more
efficient encoding or one that does not rely on slack variables. The
cooling system optimization use case would benefit from a more scal-
able system encoding. Additionally, the auto-carrier loading use case
52

=== PAGE BREAK ===

could benefit from more optimal modeling to achieve better solution
quality and shorter runtimes. Specific hardware modalities combined
with optimized modeling strategies could further improve the results
obtained.
4. The insights gained and implementations conducted in this project
should serve as a blueprint for identifying additional industrial prob-
lems suitable for quantum computing. Building on these examples,
both academia and industry can collaborate to develop reusable compo-
nents, open-source frameworks, and standardized benchmarking proto-
cols. These efforts will enable consistent tracking of progress and ensure
comparability across different approaches. Collaborative initiatives
such as QCHALLenge and QUTAC highlight the importance of align-
ing problem definitions, hardware roadmaps, and software toolchains
among stakeholders. Continued cooperation will strengthen the Eu-
ropean quantum ecosystem, foster reproducible experimentation, and
accelerate the realization of industrially relevant quantum utility.
5. Looking ahead, the evolution of quantum computing hardware is char-
acterized by rapid advancements accompanied by ongoing uncertain-
ties. Superconducting and gate-based architectures continue to im-
prove through higher fidelities and modular designs, while quantum
annealing remains valuable for heuristic exploration of combinatorial
problems. Ion-trap systems offer high-fidelity operations, though their
scalability to industrial levels remains open. Emerging approaches such
as photonic, neuromorphic, and topological quantum computing show
promise but currently have limited industrial integration. Over the
next decade, progress is expected along three interdependent threads:
solver-aware problem modeling that formulates industrial challenges
compatible with both classical and quantum solvers; hardware matura-
tion focused on embedding efficiency, error mitigation, and integration
with classical control systems; and sustained collaboration among in-
dustry, academia, and hardware providers through shared benchmarks,
data, and open frameworks like QUARK.
53

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Acknowledgments
This paper was partially funded by the German Federal Ministry of Research,
Technology and Space (BMFTR) through the funding program “Quantum
Computing – Applications for the Industry” (QCHALLenge) based on the al-
lowance “Development of digital technologies” (contract number: 01MQ22008).
AI tools (OpenAI ChatGPT) were used to support text refinement and visual
material. The authors retained full responsibility for the scientific content.
54

=== PAGE BREAK ===

References
[1] QAR Lab.Projekt QCHALLenge, BMWK. [Accessed 15-07-2025].url:
https://qarlab.de/qchallenge/.
[2] Abhishek Awasthi et al. “Real World Application of Quantum-Classical
Optimization for Production Scheduling”. In:2024 IEEE International
Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE). Vol. 02.
2024, pp. 239–244.
[3] Florian Krellner et al. “Solving a real-world modular logistic schedul-
ing problem with a quantum-classical metaheuristics”. In:2025 Inter-
national Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE).
July 2025. pre-print - arXiv:2507.21701(quant-ph).
[4] KIPU Quantum.PlanQK. [Accessed 04-09-2025].url:https://platform.
planqk.de/community.
[5] Aqarios.Unlock Quantum-Powered Optimization with Luna. [Accessed
04-09-2025].url:https://aqarios.com/platform/.
[6] GitHub.QUARK-framework. [Accessed 04-09-2025].url:https : / /
github.com/QUARK-framework/QUARK-framework.
[7] QuCUN.Das Quantum Computing User Network in Deutschland. [Ac-
cessed 04-09-2025].url:https://qucun.de.
[8] Quantum Technology and Application Consortium – QUTAC et al.
“Industry quantum computing applications”. In:EPJ Quantum Tech-
nol.8.1 (2021), p. 25.doi:10.1140/epjqt/s40507- 021- 00114- x.
url:https://doi.org/10.1140/epjqt/s40507-021-00114-x.
[9] QAR Lab. Accessed September 30, 2025.url:https://qarlab.de/
en/talk-on-bitcom-2024.
[10] QAR Lab. Accessed September 30, 2025.url:https://qarlab.de/
en / qchallenge - publications - for - qce - conference - 2024 - in -
montreal.
[11] QAR Lab. Accessed September 30, 2025.url:https://qarlab.de/
en/contributions-to-qce-conference-2025.
55

=== PAGE BREAK ===

[12] Hassan Soubra et al. “Comprehensive Review of Metrics and Measure-
ments of Quantum Systems”. In:Metrics2.2 (2025).issn: 3042-5042.
doi:10.3390/metrics2020009.url:https://www.mdpi.com/3042-
5042/2/2/9.
[13] Karen Wintersperger et al. “Neutral atom quantum computing hard-
ware: performance and end-user perspective”. In:EPJ Quantum Tech-
nology10.1 (Aug. 2023).issn: 2196-0763.doi:10.1140/epjqt/s40507-
023- 00190-1.url:http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjqt/s40507-
023-00190-1.
[14] Koen Alexander et al.A manufacturable platform for photonic quan-
tum computing. 2024. arXiv:2404.17570 [quant-ph].url:https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2404.17570.
[15] David Aasen et al.Roadmap to fault tolerant quantum computation
using topological qubit arrays. 2025. arXiv:2502.12252 [quant-ph].
url:https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.12252.
[16] D-Wave.Quantum Realized. [Accessed 15-07-2025].url:https : / /
www.dwavequantum.com.
[17] D-Wave.The AdvantageTM Quantum Computer. [Accessed 15-07-2025].
url:https://www.dwavequantum.com/solutions-and-products/
systems/.
[18] ParityQC.Accelerating Research with a Unique Approach NEC’s Quan-
tum Computer Research. [Accessed 23-07-2025].url:https://parityqc.
com/a-new-quantum-annealer-by-nec.
[19] Ana Palacios et al.A scalable 2-local architecture for quantum anneal-
ing of Ising models with arbitrary dimensions. 2025.doi:https : / /
doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevApplied.23.054070. arXiv:2404.06861
[quant-ph].url:https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.06861.
[20] D-Wave. Accessed August 8, 2025.url:https://www.dwavequantum.
com/media/3xvdipcn/14-1058a-a_advantage_processor_overview.
pdf.
[21] R. Harris et al. “Experimental demonstration of a robust and scalable
flux qubit”. In:Physical Review B81.13 (Apr. 2010).issn: 1550-235X.
doi:10.1103/physrevb.81.134510.url:http://dx.doi.org/10.
1103/PhysRevB.81.134510.
56

=== PAGE BREAK ===

[22] D-Wave. Accessed August 8, 2025.url:https://www.dwavequantum.
com/media/wakjcpsf/adv2_4400q_whitepaper-1.pdf.
[23] D-Wave. Accessed August 8, 2025.url:https://www.nextplatform.
com/2025/03/31/d- wave- pushes- back- at- critics- shows- off-
aggressive-quantum-roadmap/.
[24] Qilimanjaro. Accessed August 5, 2025.url:https://www.qilimanjaro.
tech/qilimanjaro-quantum-tech-and-do-it-now-selected-to-
advance-european-quantum-computing-as-part-of-eurohpc-ju-
initiative/.
[25] IBM Quantum Computing.Technology for the Quantum Future. [Ac-
cessed 15-07-2025].url:https://www.ibm.com/quantum/technology#
roadmap.
[26] IQM.Development Roadmap. [Accessed 15-07-2025].url:https://
meetiqm.com/technology/roadmap/.
[27] J. Kelly et al. “State preservation by repetitive error detection in a
superconducting quantum circuit”. In:Nature519.7541 (Mar. 2015),
pp. 66–69.issn: 1476-4687.doi:10.1038/nature14270.url:http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature14270.
[28] Julian Kelly. Accessed August 8, 2025.url:https : / / research .
google/blog/a-preview-of-bristlecone-googles-new-quantum-
processor/.
[29] Frank Arute et al. “Quantum supremacy using a programmable super-
conducting processor”. In:Nature574.7779 (Oct. 2019), pp. 505–510.
issn: 1476-4687.doi:10 . 1038 / s41586 - 019 - 1666 - 5.url:http :
//dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1666-5.
[30] Jerry Chow, Oliver Dial, and Jay Gambetta. Accessed August 8, 2025.
url:https://www.ibm.com/quantum/blog/127- qubit- quantum-
processor-eagle.
[31] Jami R¨ onkk¨ o et al. “On-premises superconducting quantum computer
for education and research”. In:EPJ Quantum Technology11.1 (Apr.
2024).issn: 2196-0763.doi:10.1140/epjqt/s40507-024-00243-z.
url:http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjqt/s40507-024-00243-z.
[32] Jay Gambetta. Accessed August 8, 2025.url:https://www.ibm.com/
quantum/blog/quantum-roadmap-2033.
57

=== PAGE BREAK ===

[33] IBM. Accessed August 8, 2025.url:https://newsroom.ibm.com/
2023-12-04-IBM-Debuts-Next-Generation-Quantum-Processor-
IBM- Quantum- System- Two, - Extends- Roadmap- to- Advance- Era-
of-Quantum-Utility.
[34] Jay Gambetta and Ryan Mandelbaum. Accessed August 8, 2025.url:
https://www.ibm.com/quantum/blog/qdc-2024.
[35] Ryan Mandelbaum et al. Accessed August 8, 2025.url:https://www.
ibm.com/quantum/blog/large-scale-ftqc.
[36] Rajeev Acharya et al. “Quantum error correction below the surface
code threshold”. In:Nature638.8052 (Dec. 2024), pp. 920–926.issn:
1476-4687.doi:10.1038/s41586- 024- 08449- y.url:http://dx.
doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-08449-y.
[37] IQM. Accessed August 8, 2025.url:https://meetiqm.com/products/
iqm-radiance/.
[38] Google Quantum AI.Our quantum computing roadmap. [Accessed 15-
07-2025].url:https://quantumai.google/roadmap.
[39] Quantinuum.Technical perspective: By the end of the decade, we will
deliver universal, fully fault-tolerant quantum computing.https : / /
www.quantinuum.com/blog/technical-perspective-by-the-end-
of- the- decade- we- will- deliver- universal- fault- tolerant-
quantum-computing. [Accessed 15-08-2025].
[40] Inc. IonQ.IonQ’s Accelerated Roadmap: Turning Quantum Ambition
into Reality — ionq.com.https://ionq.com/blog/ionqs-accelerated-
roadmap-turning-quantum-ambition-into-reality. [Accessed 24-
06-2025].
[41] Quantinuum.Quantinuum Unveils Accelerated Roadmap to Achieve
Universal, Fully Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computing by 2030.https:
/ / www . quantinuum . com / press - releases / quantinuum - unveils -
accelerated- roadmap- to- achieve- universal- fault- tolerant-
quantum-computing-by-2030. [Accessed 24-06-2025].
[42] GitHub.QCHALLenge-FW. [Accessed 29-09-2025].url:https : / /
github.com/Project-QCHALLenge/QCHALLenge-FW.
[43] D-Wave. Accessed October 27, 2025.url:https://docs.dwavequantum.
com/en/latest/industrial_optimization/leap_hybrid.html.
58

=== PAGE BREAK ===

[44] railOscope.Infrastracture. [Accessed 29-09-2025].url:https://railoscope.
com/workspace/6074970aaba15e47fca2625d?capability=TcBEfyVmiJTWLZm8&
branchId=6281fc03a6ce9f408c072307&noTT=true.
[45] Peter J. Eder et al. “Efficient active–passive vehicle coordination in
multimodal transportation networks”. In:Transportation Research Part
E: Logistics and Transportation Review203 (Nov. 2025), p. 104318.
issn: 1366-5545.doi:10 . 1016 / j . tre . 2025 . 104318.url:http :
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2025.104318.
[46] Nico Kraus et al.Quantum Annealing Hyperparameter Analysis for
Optimal Sensor Placement in Production Environments. 2025. arXiv:
2507.16584 [cs.ET].url:https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.16584.
[47] Christian J¨ ack, Jochen G¨ onsch, and D¨ ormann-Osuna Hans. “Load Fac-
tor Optimization for the Auto Carrier Loading Problem”. In:Trans-
portation Science57.6 (2023).
[48] IBM ILOG Cplex. “V12. 1: User’s Manual for CPLEX”. In:Interna-
tional Business Machines Corporation46.53 (2009), p. 157.
[49] Leonhard H¨ olscher et al.Quantum Simulation-Based Optimization of
a Cooling System. 2025. arXiv:2504.15460 [quant-ph].url:https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2504.15460.
[50] Yize Sun et al.First Experience with Real-Time Control Using Simu-
lated VQC-Based Quantum Policies. 2025. arXiv:2508.01690 [quant-ph].
url:https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.01690.
[51] Daniel Hein et al. “A benchmark environment motivated by industrial
control problems”. In:2017 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational
Intelligence (SSCI). IEEE, Nov. 2017, pp. 1–8.doi:10.1109/ssci.
2017 . 8280935.url:http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1109 / SSCI . 2017 .
8280935.
[52] Lukas Schulte et al.Variational Quantum Circuits in Offline Con-
textual Bandit Problems. 2025. arXiv:2509.07633 [quant-ph].url:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.07633.
59