A case study in programming a quantum annealer for hard operational planning
problems
Eleanor G. Rieﬀel, Davide Venturelli, Bryan O’Gorman, Minh B. Do, Elicia Prystay, and Vadim N. Smelyanskiy
QuAIL, NASA Ames Research Center, Moﬀett Field, CA 94035
We report on a case study in programming an early quantum annealer to attack optimization
problems related to operational planning. While a number of studies have looked at the perfor-
mance of quantum annealers on problems native to their architecture, and others have examined
performance of select problems stemming from an application area, ours is one of the ﬁrst studies of
a quantum annealer’s performance on parametrized families of hard problems from a practical do-
main. We explore two diﬀerent general mappings of planning problems to quadratic unconstrained
binary optimization (QUBO) problems, and apply them to two parametrized families of planning
problems, navigation-type and scheduling-type. We also examine two more compact, but problem-
type speciﬁc, mappings to QUBO, one for the navigation-type planning problems and one for the
scheduling-type planning problems. We study embedding properties and parameter setting, and
examine their eﬀect on the eﬃciency with which the quantum annealer solves these problems. From
these results we derive insights useful for the programming and design of future quantum annealers:
problem choice, the mapping used, the properties of the embedding, and the annealing proﬁle all
matter, each signiﬁcantly aﬀecting the performance.
I. INTRODUCTION
Quantum computing has been proven to provide more
eﬃcient means for solving certain classes of specialized
problems than is possible classically, and in other cases
is strongly suspected to do so [31, 37]. There are other
classes of problems, however, for which quantum comput-
ing does not provide an advantage. One of the biggest
open questions in quantum computing is the breadth of
its applications. Many of the most complex computations
carried out in the practical world today use heuristic al-
gorithms which have not been mathematically proven to
outperform other approaches, but have been shown to
be more eﬀective empirically. Quantum heuristic algo-
rithms exist, but it is only when quantum computational
devices that can carry out these algorithms become avail-
able that we can learn whether they are more eﬀective
than current classical approaches. The most prominent
quantum heuristic is quantum annealing.
Quantum annealing [16, 18, 24, 42] is a metaheuristic
for solving optimization problems which bears some re-
semblance to simulated annealing, a classical metaheuris-
tic. It works by starting the system in the ground state of
a known, easy-to-implement Hamiltonian HI and gradu-
ally varying the Hamiltonian until it becomes a Hamilto-
nian HP that encodes the cost function for the problem
at hand:
H(s) =A(s)HI +B(s)HP, (1)
where s∈ [0, 1], A(0) = 1 =B(1), and A(1) = 0 =B(0).
The intuition behind quantum annealing is that it ex-
plores the cost-function landscape, but has means of ex-
ploration not open to classical methods such as quantum
tunneling.
Within the last couple of years, D-Wave quantum an-
nealers have become available. While debate continues
as to the extent to which the D-Wave machine is quan-
tum [7, 8, 23, 40, 41, 43, 45, 46], these machines provide
the ﬁrst opportunity for researchers to experiment with
quantum annealing. Quantum computational hardware
is maturing to the point that a number of diﬀerent quan-
tum computational devices implementing specialized al-
gorithms such as quantum annealing will become avail-
able in the next several years.
Because most physical interactions are 2-local (i.e.
pairwise), most emerging quantum technologies will sup-
port only 2-local interactions. For this reason, the prob-
lem Hamiltonian HP should be Ising, containing only 2-
local terms between the qubits. A standard translation
maps between problem Hamiltonians on qubits and cost
functions of binary variables. When translated to a cost
function, the 2-local condition on the problem Hamiltio-
nian means that the cost function must be a Quadratic
Unconstrained Binary Optimization (QUBO) problem.
Furthermore, limitations on the ability to couple a sin-
gle qubit to more than a few other qubits, means that
variables that appear in many terms will need to be rep-
resented by multiple physical qubits in order to enable
the required connections. For example, the D-Wave pro-
cessors use a Chimera architecture in which each qubit is
connected to at most 6 other qubits (See Fig. 13), so any
logical qubit in problem Hamiltonian that appears with
more than 6 other logical qubits must be represented by
multiple physical qubits in order for the problem to be
expressible in this architecture. The ﬁrst step, obtain-
ing the QUBO, is referred to as mapping the problem to
QUBO. The second step is referred to as embedding the
QUBO in the hardware. Problems that ﬁt directly on
the machine, so do not require an embedding step, are
referred to as native problems.
Given a speciﬁc quantum annealing hardware architec-
ture, there are three high-level research challenges:
• Problem design: Identify potential applications
with appropriately diﬃcult combinatorial opti-
mization problems; extract core aspects of these
arXiv:1407.2887v1  [quant-ph]  10 Jul 2014

=== PAGE BREAK ===

2
problems that contribute to their diﬃculty; gener-
ate families of benchmark problems that are small
enough to be run on the newly available devices,
but are nevertheless interesting in spite of their
smallness.
• Mapping to QUBO: Design general approaches
to map these problems to QUBO problems, and
to make good choices of parameters, such as the
relative weighting of QUBO terms.
• Embedding in hardware: Determine which
physical qubits should represent each logical qubit,
the strength of the internal couplings (between
qubits representing the same logical qubit), and
how to distribute the external couplings (between
sets of qubits representing coupled logical qubits).
Thus, there are two aspects of embedding: the
topological aspect and the parameter-setting as-
pect.
In future architectures, there will be additional research
challenges, such as making good choices for the annealing
time and the annealing proﬁle (the functions A(s) and
B(s) determining the weighting of the driver Hamiltonian
and the problem Hamiltonian throughout the run).
A previous paper [38] focused on the design of
two parametrized families of hard planning problems,
navigation-type and scheduling-type, that capture as-
pects common to many real-world planning problems, ex-
hibit exponential scaling in hardness even at small sizes,
and provide insights into state-of-the-art planning algo-
rithms. These problems can be used to investigate novel
approaches to planning problems, as we do here for quan-
tum annealing. Since these problems are optimization
versions of NP-complete problems, we expect any ap-
proach, whether quantum or classical, to scale exponen-
tially with problem size. In the classical case, the slope
of that exponential can be radically diﬀerent from algo-
rithm to algorithm, and we expect the same to be true
for quantum heuristics. Some quantum heuristics will
be better than others, and there is the exciting possibil-
ity that quantum approaches could outperform classical
heuristics on these or other hard combinatorial optimiza-
tion problems. Such an algorithm would have signiﬁcant
practical impact.
This paper focuses on the second and third program-
ming challenges, mapping and embedding, for hard com-
binatorial optimization problems that arise in opera-
tional planning. We explore multiple ways of mapping
planning problems to QUBO problems, explore embed-
dings of these problems, and provide comparisons of the
eﬀectiveness of the DWave Two machine housed at NASA
Ames in solving these problems under diﬀerent mappings
and parameter choices. In particular, we examine two dif-
ferent approaches for mapping general planning problems
to QUBO problems, and apply both of these mappings to
the navigation-type family and the scheduling-type fam-
ily of planning problems of [38]. In part because we are
only able to embed the smallest size problems in the D-
Wave Two architecture under these mappings, we devel-
oped two more compact but problem-type speciﬁc em-
beddings, one for the navigation-type problems and one
for the scheduling-type problems. Ultimately, we are in-
terested in the general approaches, since only they would
be applicable to real-world planning problems that con-
tain aspects of both navigation and scheduling that are
not easily separated. But at this early stage we can learn
from the behavior of the quantum annealer on the prob-
lems obtained from the more specialized mappings.
We also explore embedding properties and parameter
choices, and their relation to the eﬃciency with which the
D-Wave Two solves these problems. For example, the in-
ternal couplings between physical qubits representing the
same logical qubits must be set. Here, we look at the case
in which all internal couplings have the same strength
Jint, and investigate how the performance is aﬀected by
variations in this value. We are particularly interested
in what these initial results tell us about how diﬀerent
future machine architectures and diﬀerent programming
choices could aﬀect the ability of these machines to solve
these problems.
Our work is the ﬁrst to explore the programming and
performance of a D-Wave machine on parametrized fam-
ilies of hard problems stemming from applications. A
number of studies have benchmarked D-Wave perfor-
mance on native problems [8, 39, 47–49]. A recent study
[44] analyzes performance on families of non-native prob-
lems, random 2-dimensional Ising lattices and random
Ising problems on fully connected graphs. As non-native
problems, they do require embeddings, and the paper ex-
plores similar issues in that context to some we explore
here such as the setting of the internal coupling constant
Jint, but while these structures appear in appications,
these problems do not come from a speciﬁc applications.
On the other hand, a number of groups have explored
applications [3, 5, 25, 32–34], but either on set of small
instances for which there is no notion of hardness or a few
larger, but speciﬁc instances, rather than parametrized
families of instances whose hardness is expected to scale
exponentially for all approaches, and on which the per-
formance of the best classical approaches conﬁrms the
exponentially increasing hardness with size. Very recent
work [35] suggests a programmatic approach to some of
the issues we discuss here, such as setting Jint, with ex-
amples to problems from a few diﬀerent application do-
mains.
Our main contributions include an analysis of perfor-
mance on a large, parametrized set of hard benchmark
problems stemming from an application domain, a com-
parison of the eﬀectiveness of diﬀerent mappings of these
problems to QUBO, an investigation of embedding prop-
erties and parameter setting and their eﬀect on perfor-
mance, and an evaluation of future architectures in light
of these ﬁndings. We derive from this study insights use-
ful for the programming and design of future quantum
annealers. Speciﬁcally,

=== PAGE BREAK ===

3
• scheduling-type planning problems are more
amenable to near-term quantum annealing ap-
proaches than navigation-type planning problems,
which are diﬃcult to embed in the hardware,
• the choice of QUBO mapping makes a marked dif-
ference in the success of an annealing algorithm
even when the QUBO sizes are similar,
• embedding metrics beyond embedding size and
maximum component size are needed in order to
predict and optimize performance,
• increasing the size of the unit cells of the Chimera
architecture (Fig. 13), and thereby the local con-
nectivity, would much more signiﬁcantly impact
our ability to run instances from applications than
would simply increasing the number of unit cells,
and
• support for diﬀerent annealing proﬁles (weightings
of the driver and problem Hamiltonians throughout
the run) need to be supported and could potentially
lead to signiﬁcantly improved results.
We ﬁrst provide a brief review of classical planning
(Sec. II), and then describe the parametrized families of
hard navigation-type and scheduling-type planning prob-
lems used in our experiments in Secs. III and IV respec-
tively. Readers who have previously read [38] may skip
to section Sec.V. In Sec.V, we describe the two general
approaches to mapping classical planning problems to
QUBO problems, followed by the two problem-type spe-
ciﬁc mappings. Our methods, particularly the param-
eters we used for our annealing runs, are described in
Sec.VI. Sec.VII describes and analyzes our results on
the scheduling-type family of planning problems, and
Sec. VIII describes our few results on the navigation-
type family of planning problems. Sec.IX examines the
embeddability of these problems in future hardware ar-
chitectures. In Sec.X, we conclude with a summary of
our results and their implications for the programming
and design of quantum annealers.
II. AN OVERVIEW OF THE CLASSICAL
PLANNING FORMALISM
Classical planning problems, speciﬁcally STRIPS plan-
ning problems [19, 20], are expressed in terms of binary
state variables (sometimes called predicates) and actions
(sometimes called operators). Examples of state vari-
ables in the rover domain are “Rover R is in location X”
and “Rover R has a soil sample from location X,” which
may be true or false. Actions consist of two lists,
• a set of preconditions and
• a set of eﬀects (or postconditions).
The set of preconditions can be divided into positive pre-
conditions, those that must be true, and negative precon-
ditions, those that must be false. The set of eﬀects can be
divided similarly into a set of positive eﬀects and a set of
negative eﬀects. In classical planning, it is conventional
that the preconditions for an action must be positive, so
the set of preconditions is a subset of state variables that
must be set to true in order for the action to be possi-
ble to carry out. When this convention is followed, the
set of negative preconditions will be empty. The eﬀects
of an action consists of a subset of state variables with
the values they take on if the action is carried out. For
example, the action “Rover R moves from location X to
location Y” has one precondition, “Rover R is in location
X = true” and has two eﬀects “Rover R is in location X
= false” and “Rover R is in location Y = true.”
A speciﬁc planning problem speciﬁes an initial state ,
with values speciﬁed for all state variables, and a goal,
speciﬁed values for one or more state variables. As for
preconditions, goals are conventionally positive, so the
speciﬁed value for the goal variables is true. Generally,
the goal speciﬁes values for only a small subset of the
state variables. A plan is a sequence of actions. A valid
plan, or a solution to the planning problem, is a sequence
of actions A1,A 2,...,A L such that the state at time step
ti−1 meets the preconditions for action Ai, the eﬀects of
action Ai are reﬂected in the state at time step ti, and
the state at the end has all of the goal variables set to
true.
III. PARAMETERIZED FAMILIES OF
NAVIGATION-STYLE PLANNING PROBLEMS
Navigation is a critical component in many planning
applications and existing planning benchmarks [21, 22,
29]. Rover navigation is one such domain. Given a list
of locations a rover must visit to, say, take picture or an-
alyze samples, the planner must ﬁnd a route that makes
optimal use of resources, such as time and power, satis-
ﬁes multiple constraints, and achieves all goals. Under
the assumptions that each location need be visited only
once, the high-level navigation problem is similar to the
Hamiltonian Path problems we investigate.
A. Planning problems from undirected
Hamiltonian path (UHP)
The undirected Hamiltonian path (UHP) problem on
an undirected graphG(V,E ), withn verticesV and a set
of edgesE, is to ﬁnd a path that visits each node exactly
once. A planning problem instance based on this graph
may be formulated as follows. For each vertex v, there
are:
• An action av representing visiting v.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

4
1  1  0  1  1  1  0  1  0  1
1  1  *  1   *  *   *  *  1   *
 0  1  0   1  1  1  0  1  1  1  0  0  0   1  0  1  0  1  1  1  1  1  0   1  1  1  0  0  0  0
0  1  1  1  1  1  0  1  1  0 0  1  0  1  1  1  0  0  1  0 0  1  0  1  1  1  0  0  1  0 0  0  0  1  0  1  0  0  1  0 0  1  0  1  1  1  0  0  1  0 0  0  0  1  0  1  0  0  1  0
Initial State
Goal State
Selection pool of 
available actions
dead end dead end
preconditions: B, I
eﬀects: B=0, C=1, J=0
A     B     C     D    E      F     G     H     I      J
plan 1
plan 2
plan 1
plan 2
FIG. 1: Pictorial view of a planning problem. The initial state (e.g. Rover to the left behind the rocks, without payload) is
speciﬁed by assigning True (1) or False (0) to state variables (named A-J in this oversimpliﬁed example). The planning software
navigates a tree, where a path represents a sequence (with possible repetitions) of actions selected from a pool (colors). Each
action has preconditions on the state variables (e.g. moves can be done around the rocks and not through) which need to
be satisﬁed in order for the actions to be executed (the circles under the state variables in the search tree needs to match
True=1) and has an eﬀect on the state (colored variables in shaded regions of the new state have changed values). A valid
search plan (multiple valid plans are possible) will reach the goal state (e.g. Rover in front of the rocks to the right, with a
sample collected).
• A ‘goal’ state variablesg
v to indicate thatv needs to
be visited; sg
v =T (true) means v has been visited.
• An ‘internal’ state variable si
v represents whether
or not v has been visited. Speciﬁcally, si
v = T
means v has not been visited while si
v =F (false)
means that it has been visited. This variable en-
sures that each vertex can be visited at most once.
While including bothsg
v andsi
v (which always have
opposite values) seems redundant, it is necessary
because of the convention that allows only positive
action preconditions and goals.
• An ‘external’ state variable se
v represents whether
or not the vertex v can currently be visited given
the edge structure of the graph. Speciﬁcally, it is
set to T by an action av′ corresponding to visit-
ing a vertex v′ that is connected to v by an edge.
Otherwise, it is set to F .
Each actionav has 2 preconditions: (1) si
v =T , which
indicates that this action has not been used in the plan
already, and (2) se
v = T , indicating that this action can
legally follow the previous action.
Each actionav hasn+1 eﬀects: (1) sg
v =T , to indicate
that v has been visited, (2) si
v = F , thus excluding av
from appearing twice in the plan, (3) sets each of the
n− 1 external variables se
v′ for each of the other vertices
v′: if there is an edge from v tov′ thense
v′ =T , enabling
av′ to follow av; if there is no edge from v to v′ then av
sets se
v′ =F , preventing av′ from following av.
The initial state has all goal variables sg
v = F while
all internal and external variables si
v and se
v have value
T . Thus, any of the n actions av can be performed at
the start. A valid plan is a sequence of the n actions
that corresponds to a path along the edges that visits
all vertices exactly once.
Problem generation: We obtain a parametrized fam-
ily of UHP-based planning problems, parametrized by n

=== PAGE BREAK ===

5
andp, by using the Erd¨ os-R´ enyi modelGn,p to randomly
generate graphs withn vertices such that, for any pair of
vertices, the edge between them is included with prob-
ability p. We then derive planning problems from these
graphs as described in the preceding paragraphs. We use
the scaling parameter p = (logn + log logn)/n that has
been established as at the phase transition for the closely
related Hamiltonian cycle problem [11, 28]. We wrote a
simple C++ program to generate these problems.
IV. PARAMETRIZED FAMILIES OF
SCHEDULING-TYPE PLANNING PROBLEMS
Many planning applications include scheduling aspects
[12]. Scheduling, which deals with assigning resources
and time to tasks while taking into account constraints,
is in itself an important problem. Certain classes of
scheduling problems correspond to graph coloring. For
example, a scheduling problem, with a set of tasks and
constraints that any pair of tasks competing for the same
resource cannot be assigned the same time-slot, can be
phrased as a vertex coloring, a well-known NP-complete
problem. Speciﬁcally, the chromatic number (the small-
est number of colors needed) represents the smallest num-
ber of time-slots needed to complete a corresponding
schedule, thus representing the minimum makespan.
A. Planning problems from Vertex Coloring
Given an undirected graph G ={V,E} with n ver-
tices, the planning problem to color G with k colors is
formulated as follows. For each vertex v there are:
• k actions ac
v representing coloring v with color c.
• A ‘goal variable’ sg
v representing whether or not v
has been colored at all.
• A state variable sc
v representing whether or not v
has been colored with the color c.
Let C(v) be the set of neighboring vertices that are
connected to v by an edge. For each action ac
v, there are
|C(v)| + 1 preconditions: (1) sg
v = F , which indicates
thatv is not already colored; and (2) for each vi∈C(v),
sc
vi = F , guaranteeing that none of neighboring vi are
already colored with color c.
Each action ac
v has two eﬀects: sg
v =T and sc
v =T .
In the initial state, none of the vertices are colored:
∀v∈ V : sg
v = F , and sc
v = F . The goal state requires
that all vertices are colored: ∀v∈ V : sg
v = T . A plan
is a sequence ofn actions, each of which colors a vertexv.
Problem generation: As for the Hamiltonian path
based problems, we obtain a parametrized family of
graph-coloring-based planning problems by randomly
generating Erd¨ os-R´ enyi graphsGn,p for a variety of val-
ues of n and p. A phase transition threshold in the k-
colorability ofG(n,p ) graphs has been established for all
k≥ 3 in terms of the parameter c = m/n = p×n, the
ratio of the number of edges to the number of vertices
[1]. The threshold scales as c = k logk in the leading
term, but the precise location of this threshold is still
an open question, even for k = 3 [14]. Our runs were
done with c = 4.5, a value intermediate to the best cur-
rent lower bound [2] and upper bound [17] for the phase
transition. We extended Culberson et al.’s [15] graph
generator program, which provides methods to generate
diﬀerent types of graph controlled by various parame-
ters, to output PDDL ﬁles containing the speciﬁcation of
planning problems derived from these graphs.
V. MAPPING PLANNING PROBLEMS TO
QUBO FORM
The D-Wave quantum annealing machine can accept
problems phrased in terms of a problem HamiltonianHP
in Ising form:
EIsing(s1,...,s N) =−
N∑
i=1
h′
isi +
∑
⟨i,j⟩∈ E
J′
i,jsisj, (2)
wheresi =±1. In traditional computer science, it is un-
usual to have variablessi whose values can be taken only
from{−1, 1}, but it is common to have binary variableszi
that take values from{0, 1}. It is easy to convert between
the two forms by takingsi = 1−2zi. Any quadratic func-
tion of variables zi can be converted to Ising form, up to
a constant which does not aﬀect the energy minimization
and so can be ignored:
q(z1,...,z N) =−
N∑
i=1
hizi +
∑
⟨i,j⟩∈ E
Ji,jzizj, (3)
Thus, it suﬃces to express any problem we want
solved as a Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimiza-
tion (QUBO) problem [13, 30, 42], which will then be
converted to Ising form to run on the D-Wave machine.
In this section, we describe two diﬀerent mappings
from general classical planning problems, as described
in Section II, to QUBO form. The ﬁrst is a time-slice
approach. The second approach ﬁrst maps a planning
problem to a constraint satisfaction problem, and then
reduces higher order terms to quadratic terms through a
series of moves. As we mentioned in Sec. II, some clas-
sical planning algorithms follow the convention that an
action can have only positive preconditions. Since it is
easy to do, we deﬁne our mappings generally, so that they
work with planning problems in which actions can have
negative preconditions, as well as those that follow the
convention.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

6
A. Time-slice method
This mapping from general classical planning problems
to QUBO form is a variant of the one developed and
described in [42].
The method requires setting a speciﬁc plan length L.
For the two families of problems we consider, the plan
length L is easy to determine; for the navigation-type
problems, it isn, the number of sites, and for scheduling-
type problems, it is 1, since all vertices can be colored at
the same time. In other cases, it may be necessary to run
quantum annealing on QUBOs corresponding to diﬀerent
plan lengths, or to employ more sophisticated techniques
to determine the plan length to use [6].
If the original planning problem has N state variables
xi and M actions yj and we are looking for a plan of
length L, then we deﬁne a time-slice QUBO problem in
terms ofN(L + 1) +LM binary variables. There are two
groups of binary variables. The ﬁrst group consists of
N(L + 1) binary variablesx(t)
i that indicate whether the
state variablexi is 0 or 1 at time stept, fort∈{ 0,...,L }.
The second group consists of LM binary variables y(t)
j
that indicate whether or not the action yj is carried out
between time steps t− 1 and t. We can think of the
entire set of binary variables as an alternating string of
N variables corresponding to the state at a given time,
followed by M variables corresponding to the actions,
followed by a N variables corresponding to the state at
the next time index, etc. The structure of the QUBO is
illustrated in Figure 2.
The total cost function is written as a sum
H = Hinitial +Hgoal +Hno− op
+Hprecond +Heﬀects +Hconﬂicts.
We ﬁrst give a mapping that is more general than we
need, and then explain how it can be simpliﬁed in our
situation. The ﬁrst two terms are straightforward. They
capture the initial condition and the goal condition. Let
I(+) be the set of state variables that are 1 in the ini-
tial condition andI(−) be the set of state variables that
are initially set to 0. Similarly, let G(+) be the set of
goal variables with value 1 and G(−) be the set of goal
variables with value 0. (We describe the mapping for gen-
eral classical planning problems that do not necessarily
follow the convention that preconditions and goals must
be positive.) To capture the boundary conditions, the
requirement that a plan start in the appropriate initial
state and meets the goals, we include the following terms
in the cost function:
Hinitial =
∑
i∈I(+)
(
1−x(0)
i
)
+
∑
i∈I(−)
x(0)
i
and
Hgoal =
∑
i∈G(+)
(
1−x(L)
i
)
+
∑
i∈G(−)
x(L)
i .
M actions
N state variables
no-op
precond+eﬀects
eﬀects
yt=1
yt=2
xt=L
xt=0
xt=1
initial
goal
single-action
L-1 times
FIG. 2: Time-slice QUBO structure for a planning problem
with only positive preconditions and goals. Each node repre-
sents a state variable (left) or an action (right) at any given
time t. Time ﬂows from top to bottom, and variables y(t)
i for
the actions at time t are shown between the state variables
x(t−1)
i for one time step and the state variables x(t)
i for the
next time step. The node grayscale intensity represents the
magnitude of local ﬁeld (bias) hi applied to a given qubit i,
and the double contour in a node indicates a negative bias.
(One interesting property of this mapping is that the nodes
representing state variables for t⁄= 0 and t⁄= L have the
same h value, since they all come from Hno−op. For this rea-
son, they are all shown in same color in the diagram). Edges
represents the couplings Jij. Their weight is not illustrated in
the ﬁgure. In this example we consider Hsingle-action instead of
Hconﬂicts, so all of the actions at a given time step are coupled
to each other.
We next add terms to the cost function that penalize
a plan if an action is placed at time t but the prior state
does not have the appropriate preconditions or if the sub-
sequent state does not reﬂect the eﬀects of that action.
Furthermore, we must penalize variable changes that are
not the result of an action. We start with this term, the
Hno-op term, that penalizes variable changes:
Hno− op =
L∑
t=1
N∑
i=1
[
x(t−1)
i +x(t)
i − 2x(t−1)
i x(t)
i
]
This term gives cost penalty of 1 every time a variable
is ﬂipped. Of course, when the eﬀect of an action does

=== PAGE BREAK ===

7
result in a variable ﬂipping, we do not want this penalty,
so we will make up for this penalty when we add the term
that corresponds to the eﬀects of an action. First, the
term that penalizes violation of the preconditions looks
like
Hprecond =
L∑
t=1
M∑
j=1


∑
i∈C(+)
j
(
1−x(t−1)
i
)
y(t)
j
+
∑
i∈C(−)
j
x(t−1)
i y(t)
j


whereC(+)
j is the set of positive preconditions for actionj
andC(−)
j is the set of negative preconditions. LetE(+)
j be
the set of positive eﬀects for action j andE(−)
j the set of
negative eﬀects. The penalty if the appropriate eﬀects do
not follow the actions is captured by the following term:
Heﬀects =
L∑
t=1
M∑
j=1


∑
i∈E (+)
j
y(t)
j
(
1 +x(t−1)
i − 2x(t)
i
)
+
∑
i∈E (−)
j
y(t)
j
(
2x(t)
i −x(t−1)
i
)

.
In order to understand this term, we must consider it
together with the no-op term. When y(t)
j = 1, the cor-
responding term for i ∈ E(+)
j (resp. i ∈ E(−)
j ), taken
together with the no-op term , can be written
(
1 + 2x(t−1)
i
)(
1−x(t)
i
)
(resp.
(
3− 2x(t−1)
i
)
x(t)
i
for negative eﬀects), resulting in a positive penalty unless
x(t)
i = 1 (resp. x(t)
i = 0). By using this form we have
corrected for the corresponding no-op term.
Classical planners often allow for parallel plans not just
“linear plans” in which more than one action can take
place at one time if those actions could have been done
in any order, meaning that the eﬀects of any one action
do not conﬂict with preconditions of the other actions.
What we have done so far works ﬁne when the precondi-
tions mean that only one action can take place per time
period as is the case in the navigation problems. In the
scheduling problems, multiple actions can take place at
the same time without conﬂicting. For general planning
problems, we can either rule out multiple actions by im-
posing an additional term
Hsingle-action =
L∑
t=1


M∑
j=1
y(t)
j − 1


2
,
or we need to add terms to penalize potential conﬂicts.
To complicate matters, when more than one action can
take place at a given time, we are in danger of over-
correcting for the no-op term. If multiple actions at the
same time have the same eﬀect, theHeﬀects term will add
a term for each of those actions, thus overcompensating
for the no-op penalty. To avoid overcompensating, we
penalize multiple actions at the same time having the
same eﬀect, discouraging all such actions. A less strin-
gent way to avoid overcompensating would be to add this
penalty only when the eﬀect changes the variable, as we
have done in the no-op term. The problem is that na-
tively that is not a quadratic term. Of course one could
then reduce that term, but here we choose to use the
more stringent solution. To ensure that two actions that
conﬂict in the sense that positive preconditions of one
overlap with negative eﬀects of the other or vice versa,
and to avoid overcompensating, we include the penalty
Hconﬂict =
L∑
t=1
N∑
i=1


∑
j|i∈C(+)
j ∪E (−)
j
∑
j′⁄=j|i∈E (−)
j′
y(t)
j y(t)
j′
+
∑
j
⏐⏐⏐i∈C(−)
j ∪E (+)
j
∑
j′⁄=j
⏐⏐⏐i∈E (+)
j′
y(t)
j y(t)
j′

.
While for explanatory purposes it was useful to in-
clude variables for the state at time t = 0, those can be
set ahead of time, so that we don’t need to include the
Hinitial term. The same is true of the Hgoal term. We can
also replace all of their occurrences in Hno-op,Hcondition,
and Heﬀect with these set values to simplify those con-
straints. Furthermore, if a state variable ﬁrst appears at
time step t, then in the no-op term connecting it with
the previous level, we can set it to 0. Finally, for the
ﬁnal action time slot, we can remove any actions whose
eﬀects conﬂict with the goals or do not contribute to
the goals. These simpliﬁcations result in modiﬁed terms
H′
no-op, H′
condition, and H′
eﬀect. Additionally, since in our
setting we have followed the convention that precondi-
tions must be positive, we can use a simpler version of
the Hprecond term:
H′
precond =
L∑
t=1
M∑
j=1
∑
i∈C(+)
j
(
1−x(t−1)
i
)
y(t)
j .
For the navigation problems, the QUBO simpliﬁes to
H =H′
no− op +H′
precond +H′
eﬀects,
and for the scheduling problems the QUBO simpliﬁes to
H = Hno− op
+H′
precond +Heﬀects +Hsingle-action.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

8
B. CNF approach
A CNF expression overn Boolean variablesxi consists
of a bunch of clausesCa consisting ofk variables, possibly
negated, connected by logical ors:
b1∨b2∨···∨ bk
where
bi∈{x1,x 2,...,x n,¬x1,¬x2,...,¬xn},
and the number of variablesk in the clause can vary from
clause to clause. A CNF for a k-SAT expression consists
of clauses that all have the same number of variables k.
In a CNF coming from 2-SAT, for instance, all clauses
have the formb1∨b2. In a CNF, all of the clauses must be
satisﬁed, which means they are connected by an and op-
erator (the reason for the “conjunctive” in “conjunctive
normal form”).
We used the ﬁrst of the four PDDL to CNF translators
built in to the SATPLAN planner [26], a classical SAT-
based planner, to output planning problems in conjunc-
tive normal form (CNF). Compilation planners such as
SATPLAN perform some preprocessing, such as “reacha-
bility” and “relevance” analysis, as part of the translation
to reduce the size of the output. Reachability analysis
makes a quick determination as to whether a given ac-
tion can appear at a given time step, and removes from
consideration at that time step any actions that it has
determined cannot be carried out, which results in a sim-
pliﬁed CNF expression. Similarly, if the possible actions
at previous time steps cannot change a state variable,
the resulting expression is simpliﬁed accordingly. For ex-
ample, in the ﬁrst time step, only actions whose precon-
ditions are satisﬁed in the initial state are considered.
Then, only values of state variables that occurred in the
initial state or are eﬀects of actions considered at the ﬁrst
time step are considered. This process is iterated until it
no longer results in simpiﬁcation. Relevance analysis is
a similar process that starts its analysis in the last time
step, considering only state variables that are goals, and
then working backwards leaving only actions with eﬀects
relevant to these goals in the last action time step. Rele-
vant state variables at time step t represent the union of
state variables at time stept+1 and the preconditions of
all relevant actions at time step t. SATPLAN’s “action-
based” encoding uses an advanced reachability and rel-
evance heuristic analysis, and then further removes all
variables representing state variables while adding con-
straints that capture the relationships between actions in
consecutive time steps that were previously enforced by
relationships between actions and state variables.
We convert a CNF instance to QUBO by ﬁrst trans-
forming it to Polynomial Unconstrained Binary Opti-
mization (PUBO), a generalization of QUBO in which
the objective function is a pseudo-Boolean of arbitrary
degree. For each clause in a given CNF instance, we in-
troduce a term to the PUBO instance equal to the con-
junction of the negation of the literals in that clause,
where a positive literal is replaced by the corresponding
binary variable and a negative literal is replaced by the
diﬀerence of one and the corresponding binary variable.
For example, the CNF term (x1∨¬x2∨¬x3∨x4) would
correspond to the PUBO term (1 −x1)x2x3(1−x4).
We then reduce higher degree terms in the PUBO in-
stance using an iterative greedy algorithm that is related
to one described in [9]. At each step, the pair of vari-
ables that appears in the most terms is replaced by an
ancilla variable corresponding to their conjunction. (If
there are multiple such pairs, then one is chosen arbi-
trarily.) A penalty term is introduced to enforce that the
ancilla variable indeed corresponds to the requisite con-
junction. The penalty weight we use is equal to one plus
the greater of the sums of the magnitudes of the positive
coeﬃcients and negative coeﬃcients of the terms the an-
cilla is used to reduce [4]. The one is added to ensure
that the constraint-satisfying states have lower energy
than the constraint-violating states. One is convenient,
and in keeping with the integer coeﬃcients for the other
terms, but any positive constant would do. This proce-
dure is repeated until the resulting PUBO is quadratic.
C. Direct mapping of underlying graph problems
to QUBO
We now turn to two more compact, but problem-
type speciﬁc mappings, the ﬁrst mapping navigation-type
problems to QUBO problems and the second mapping
scheduling-type problems to QUBO.
1. Direct mapping of graph coloring to QUBO
For a graph coloring problem with n vertices and k
colors, we have kn binary variables, xic, where xic = 1
means that vertex i is colored with color c, and xic = 0
means it is not.
The QUBO contains two diﬀerent types of penalty
terms. The ﬁrst corresponds to the constraint that each
vertex must be colored by one, and no more than one,
color: ∑k
c=1xic = 1. So for each vertex i, we have a term
(
1−
k∑
c=1
xic
)2
.
The second corresponds to the constraint that two ver-
tices connected by an edge cannot be colored with the
same color. For each vertex i, we have a term
∑
(i,j)∈E
∑
c
xicxjc.
Altogether the QUBO is
n∑
i=1
(
1−
k∑
c=1
xic
)2
+
∑
(i,j)∈E
∑
c
xicxjc.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

9
2. Direct mapping of Hamiltonian Path Problems to QUBO
For a Hamiltonian path problem with n sites, we have
n2 variables
{x11,...,x 1n,x 21,...,x 2n,...,x n1,...,x nn.}
The ﬁrst indexi gives the site, the second index gives the
time slot, so xij = 1 means that the ith site is the jth
site visited, and xij = 0 means that the ith site is not
visited in the jth time slot.
There are three types of terms in the QUBO cost func-
tion: penalties if a site is visited more or less than once,
penalities if more than one site is visited in a given time
slot, and penalities for violation of edge constraints.
The ﬁrst type of term enforceses that each site is visited
exactly once: For each site i, we will have a term of the
form
(
∑
j
xij− 1)2.
The second type of term enforces that in each time slot
no more than one site is visited (we may as well enforce
it to be exactly one): For each time slot j, we have a
term of the form
(
∑
i
xij− 1)2.
The third type of term is a single term penalizing the
violation of edge constraints. It penalizes bisiting thei′th
site right after the ith site if they are not connected by
an edge:
j=n−1∑
j=1
∑
i,i′st(i,i′) /∈E
xijxi′,j+1.
There are 2n + 1 terms all together.
VI. METHODS
All quantum annealing runs were performed on the
509-qubit D-Wave Two machine housed at NASA Ames.
In all cases, we used an annealing time of 20 µsec, the
fastest annealing time currently available on the ma-
chine, which is also D-Wave’s recommended annealing
time given that current data suggests that an even faster
annealing time would be optimal [39]. For each embed-
ded QUBO instance, we performed 45 , 000 anneals at
each of ten gauges, for a total of 450 , 000 anneals per
QUBO instance. Gauges, which determine whether the
bit values{0, 1} of each QUBO variable are mapped to
{−1, 1} or{1,−1}, are used to reduce the eﬀects of asym-
metries in the hardware [35, 39].
From a QUBO instance generated as described in Sec-
tion V, we generate the embedded instance by running D-
Wave’s heuristic embedding software [10] on the original
QUBO instance. We use the software’s default parame-
ters, including a maximum of 10 tries, unless otherwise
noted. The output of the embedding software is a set
of disjoint connected components of the hardware graph
Ci, one for each variable xi in the original QUBO. We
performed our own parameter setting, rather than us-
ing D-Wave’s which tries successive parameter values, so
that we could obtain statistics for a variety of parameter
settings.
From the original QUBO instance, we obtain the logi-
cal Ising instance
hisi +Jijsisj
through the standard translation of the variables si =
1−2zi. To obtain the embedded Ising instance, we evenly
distribute the bias hi in the logical Ising instance among
the qubits corresponding to the nodes in Ci: we set the
linear coeﬃcient for each variable y in Ci to be hi
|Ci|.
We set all internal couplings, couplings between physi-
cal qubits that represent the same logical variable in the
original QUBO, to the internal coupling constant Jint,
a value we specify; the coeﬃcient of all quadratic terms
yy′ such that y and y′ are both in Ci for some i are set
to Jint. We describe shortly the results we obtained in
experiments varying this value. The only other couplings
are between sets of physical qubits Ci and Cj represent-
ing two diﬀerent logical variables xi and xj that appear
together in a quadratic term in the original QUBO. In
many cases there is only one edge in the hardware graph
between the qubits in Ci and Cj. In this case, we set
the coupling between them to Ji,j. When more than one
edge exists between these sets, we choose one of them,
and set its coupling to Ji,j. All other couplings are set
to zero.
Our test set consists of 100 solvable problem instances
at the phase transition for each size for both planning
problem types. We generated the problems as described
in [38], and then took the ﬁrst 100 solvable problems. For
the sizes in which [38] already had generated problems,
we use the ﬁrst 100 solvable instances tested there. The
smallest size problems we considered of the navigation-
type were of size 4. For the scheduling-type problems, we
started at size 8 because the phase transition parameter
is inaccurate for smaller sizes, biasing the results toward
unsolvable instances.
Because all of the problems we consider are solvable,
we know the ground state energy in all cases; zero, the
minimal value of the QUBO in all cases is attainable, and
from that we can compute the ground state energy of the
embedded Ising problem that was actually run. For each
embedded instance, once we obtain the 450 , 000 results
from the run, we check how many times the ground state
energy was obtained, which gives us the probability of
solution r for a 20 µsec anneal. We then compute the
expected number of runs k = ln(1−0.99)
ln(1−r) required to ob-
tain a 99% success probability, multiply by the anneal
time of 20 µsec, and report 20 k µsec, the expected to-
tal anneal time to obtain a 99% success probability. We

=== PAGE BREAK ===

10
are eﬀectively using a 0 .9 sec. cutoﬀ time, since the ex-
pected anneal time when only one anneal solves is 0 .9
secs. Given that classical planners solve these problems
in less than 0 .1 secs., with the best planners for these
problems solving them in less than 0 .01 secs. [38], this
cutoﬀ time seems reasonable.
We report the median expected total anneal time
across 100 instances, with error bars corresponding to the
35th and 65th percentiles. Thus each data point shown
represents 45 million anneals. While the total anneal-
ing time for each point is only 90 seconds, because the
read-in and read-out take considerably longer than the
anneal time, and because of contention for the machine,
the wall clock time to obtain a single data point is hours
not minutes. Finding the embedding, by far the longest
step in the process, can take minutes for the largest in-
stances, but fortunately needs to be performed only once
per QUBO instance.
The ground state energy of the embedded Ising model
will not be obtained if the ﬁnal bit values diﬀer between
any two physical qubits representing the same logical
qubit. This observation suggests a simple, totally clas-
sical error correction scheme that uses majority voting
among all physical qubits representing the same logical
qubit. This error correction scheme is working at a diﬀer-
ent level from that in Pudenz et al. [36]; the benchmark
problems in Pudenz et al. are native problems that do
not require an embedding step in order to be run on the
hardware. We report expected total anneal time both
with and without this simple form of error correction.
VII. RESULTS ON SCHEDULING-TYPE
PLANNING PROBLEMS
Because the scheduling-type planning problems em-
bedded much more easily than the navigation-type plan-
ning problems, we were able to do signiﬁcantly more
analysis of the the choices aﬀecting the D-Wave Two’s
performance on these problems than on the navigation-
type problems. We ﬁrst examine performance of the D-
Wave Two on scheduling-type instances mapped using
the two general approaches for mapping planning prob-
lems to QUBOs. We then turn to the results on these
instances using the mapping speciﬁc to the scheduling
approach, the direct mapping from scheduling-type plan-
ning problems to QUBO.
A. Time-slice and CNF mapping results
Fig. 3 shows the relative performance, in terms of
median expected total annealing time for 99% percent
success, of the D-Wave Two on the benchmark set of
scheduling-type planning problems. When at least half
of the instances do not solve within the 0 .9 sec. eﬀective
cutoﬀ time, we no longer show the point. For the CNF
mapping, that happens already by problem size 11. For
8 10 12 14 16
Problem size n: number of tasks
Median Expected Total Anneal Time 
 to 99% success in microsecs.
10 100 1000 1e+05
CNF: α=1.76±0.104
TS: α=1.37±0.087
dirMap: α=1.01±0.045
FIG. 3: Comparison of the median expected total an-
neal time to 99% percent success for the three map-
pings of scheduling-type planning problems. The re-
sults with the best Jint are shown. (See Sec. VII D and
Fig. 10 for how these values were determined.) For the CNF
mapping, Jint was{1.2, 1.3, 1.4} for problem sizes {8, 9, 10}.
For the time-slice mapping, Jint was{1.6, 1.7, 1.7, 1.7, 1.6} for
problem sizes{8, 9, 10, 11, 12}. For the direct mapping, Jint
was {1.1, 1.1, 1.3, 1.3, 1.3, 1.4, 1.4, 1.4, 1.4} for problem sizes
{8, . . . ,16}. Each data point shows the median expected total
annealing time to achieve 99% success over the 100 problems
of each size given on the x-axis. The error bars are at the
35th and 65th percentiles. When at least half of the instances
do not solve within the 0 .9 sec. eﬀective cutoﬀ time, we no
longer show the point. Also, when fewer than 65% solve, the
top of the error bar is indeterminate, as happened for the last
point shown in both the CNF and time-slice series.
the time-slice instances, at least half do not solve within
the cutoﬀ time by problem size 13, and for the direct map
by problem size 17.
Not surprisingly, the median expected total anneal
time to 99% success is substantially lower for the direct
map instances than for the time-slice or CNF instances;
it is about a factor of 100 smaller for all problem sizes in
the range. The direct mapping is tailored to this partic-
ular kind of scheduling-type planning problems, rather
than being applicable to planning problems in general.
For this reason, the QUBO mapping is much more ef-
ﬁcient (Fig. 4), exactly 3 /8 smaller than the time-slice
QUBOs across the entire size range. The typicial embed-
ding size (Fig. 6) is also smaller, roughly half that of the
other mappings. For these reasons, it is to be expected
that the performance on the directly mapped problem
instances is signiﬁcantly better than the performance for
either of the general-purpose mappings that, unlike the
direct mapping, can be applied to any planning problem.
More surprising is the substantial diﬀerence between
the performance on the time-slice mapped instances and
the CNF mapped instances, with the median expected
total annealing time to achieve 99% success being about
a factor of 5 greater for the CNF instances than the
time-slice instances (Fig. 3). The scaling for the time-
slice approach is also signiﬁcantly better than for the

=== PAGE BREAK ===

11
8 10 12 14 16
0 20 40 60 80 100
Problem size n: number of tasks
Median QUBO size
CNF
TS
dirMap
FIG. 4: Comparison of QUBO size across mappings
of the scheduling-type planning problems. The QUBO
size for the direct map is simply 3 n, and for the time-slice
map it is 8 n, where n is the number of tasks that need to
be scheduled. The QUBO sizes for the CNF mapping vary,
so for this case, we are showing the median QUBO size over
the 100 problems of that size. Some of the error bars for the
CNF mapping at the 35th and 65th percentiles are too small
to see.
CNF approach, with an α value of 1.37 rather than 1.76
(though the scaling is estimated on very few data points).
The time-slice and CNF mappings yield comparably-
sized QUBOs (Fig. 4), with similar numbers of comput-
ings (Fig. 5). For problem size n, the time-slice mapping
yields a QUBO of size 8 n qubits. The CNF approach
yields variable size QUBOs, with the median size CNF
QUBO over 100 problems only 4 to 8 qubits larger than
the median size of the time-slice QUBOs for problem sizes
{8, 9, 10, 11, 12}. The median number of couplings for
the CNF QUBOs exceeds that of the time-slice QUBOs
by only{8, 10, 8, 16, 9} for problem sizes{8, 9, 10, 11, 12}
respectively. Even the median embedding sizes of the
CNF QUBOs are only{7, 14, 26, 28, 12} qubits larger re-
spectively than the embedded time-slice QUBOs in this
range, no more than a 10% diﬀerence across this range
(Fig. 6).
B. Comparing embedding properties across
mappings
While the diﬀerence in performance between the CNF
and time-slice instances is likely due in part to the some-
what larger size of the embedded CNF QUBOs, other
factors likely contribute to this diﬀerence. One possible
factor is the size of the embedding components, the num-
ber of physical qubits representing a logical qubit. For
example, D-Wave recommends both minimizing the size
of the embedding and the maximum component size in
an embedding [10]. Also, for anti-ferromagnetic chains,
Pudenz et al. [36] showed that the performance of the
D-Wave Two decreases with chain size. Because in our
8 10 12 14 16
0 50 100 150 200
Problem size n: number of tasks
Median number of couplings
CNF
TS
dirMap
FIG. 5: Comparison of the number of couplings in the
QUBOs obtained from the three diﬀerent mappings
of the scheduling-type planning problems. The median
number of couplings in the QUBOs for the 100 problems of
each size is shown, with error bars at the 35th and 65th per-
centiles.
8 10 12 14 16
0 100 200 300 400
Problem size n: number of tasks
Median embedding size
CNF
TS
dirMap
FIG. 6: Comparison of embedding size across map-
pings of the scheduling-type planning problems. Me-
dian embedding size over the 100 problems of size n. The
error bars are at the 35th and 65th percentiles.
case the components can have a more complex topology
than a single chain, are subject to local ﬁelds, and have
couplings to qubits outside the component, it is unclear
to what extent we would see the same behavior. Thus,
the relative component sizes require investigation.
Fig. 7 (Top) conﬁrms, as would be expected given the
similar enbedding and QUBO sizes for the CNF and time-
slice instances, that the median average component size
across the 100 problems is statistically indistiguishable
in the two cases across the range of sizes. Furthermore,
throughout the size range tested, the median median
component size – the median over the 100 problem in-
stances of the median component size of each instance
– and even the median 65th percentile component size,
for both mappings is 1. By the 90th percentile, the com-
ponent size has increased signiﬁcantly in both cases, but

=== PAGE BREAK ===

12
8 10 12 14 16
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Problem size n: number of tasks
Median average component size
CNF
TS
dirMap
8 10 12 14 16
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Problem size n: number of tasks
Median 90th percentile component size
CNF
TS
dirMap
8 10 12 14 16
0 5 10 15
Problem size n: number of tasks
Median maximum component size
CNF
TS
dirMap
FIG. 7: Comparison of component sizes for scheduling-
type planning problems. Median average component size
(Top): We computed the average of the component sizes, the
number of physical qubits representing each logical qubit, and
then took the median over all the 100 problem instances of
that size. Median 90th percentile component size (Middle) :
We calculated the component size at the 90th percentile for
each problem, and then took the median over all the 100
problem instances of that size. Median maximum component
size (Bottom): We determined the largest component size for
each problem, and then took the median over all 100 instances
of each size. Error bars are at the 35th and 65th percentiles.
the two cases are statistically indistinguishable (Fig. 7
(Middle)). Even the median maximum component size
hardly diﬀers between the two mappings (Fig. 7 (Bot-
tom)): for problem sizesn ={8, 9, 10, 11, 12}, the median
maximum component size for the time-slice instances was
{9, 11, 11, 12, 13}, whereas for the CNF instances it was
{9, 11, 11.5, 13, 14}. Given that the median maximum
component size was identical for the two smallest sizes,
even though the performance was markedly diﬀerent in
the two cases, and the diﬀerence between the median
maximum component sizes was no more than 1 for the
other sizes, we conclude that component size did not con-
tribute signiﬁcantly to the diﬀerence in performance be-
tween the time-slice and CNF instances.
Even though the QUBO size under the direct map is
never much more than roughly half the size of the QUBOs
under the two general mappings in the size range consid-
ered, both in terms of number of qubits (Fig. 4) and the
number of couplings (Fig. 5), the typical component size
in the embedded direct mapping instances is markedly
larger than for the CNF and time-slice mappings. Fig. 7
shows the median average component size. The direct
map typical component size is signiﬁcantly greater than
the typical component size for the CNF and time-slice
mappings throughout the range of problem sizes. Even
at problem size 8 it is markedly higher than for the other
two. While, the median median component size was 1 for
both the CNF and time-slice mappings throughout the
range considered, the median median component size for
the direct map started at around 4 at size 8 and rose to
close to 4.5 by problem size 18.
The size of the top 10 percent of the components in
these embeddings, however, is markedly lower than that
of the CNF and time-slice mappings; even at problem
size 16 it is still lower than the value for problem size
8 for the more general mappings. These ﬁndings are
consistent with D-Wave’s recommendation to minimize
the maximum component size, not just the total embed-
ding size (or equivalently, the typical component size).
The results for the time-slice versus CNF instances of
the same underlying scheduling-type planning problems
suggest that further investigation is needed as to what
properties of mappings and embeddings correspond to
better or worse performance, and that more sophisticated
metrics for good embeddings are needed.
C. Comparing two diﬀerent annealing proﬁles
The D-Wave Two machine has ﬁxed functionsA(s) and
B(s) for the weights of the driver and problem Hamilto-
nians in the control Hamiltonian of Eqn. 1. The user
can vary only the overall annealing time, and as men-
tioned, the overwhelming evidence is that for the present
machine the shortest possible annealing time is best. In-
advertently, we were able to experiment with an alter-
nate annealing proﬁle, albeit a nonstandard one. The
D-Wave Two has two annealing lines, both common to

=== PAGE BREAK ===

13
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
1
2
3
4
5
s
GHz
FIG. 8: Weightings of the diﬀerent components of the
Hamiltonian prior to recalibration. The ﬁgure shows
the discrepancy between the strength B′(s) of the local ﬁelds
(dashed line) and the strength B(s) of the couplings (solid
line) in the problem Hamiltonian during annealing prior to
recalibration as they increase throughout the anneal. The
strength of the driver Hamiltonian as it decreases throughout
the anneal is also shown. Normally in an anneal, there is only
a single weighting for the problem Hamiltonian, as in Eqn 1.
Indeed, after recalibration, the strength of the local ﬁelds has
been adjusted to equal that of the couplings, soB′(s) becomes
B(s).
all qubits. These lines aﬀect the local ﬁelds hi and cou-
pling coeﬃcients Jij diﬀerently. When they are not fully
synchronized, eﬀectively the B(s) weighting splits into
two weightings, the original B(s) weighting for the cou-
plings and a B′(s) weighting for the local ﬁelds. When
we ﬁrst ran, these two lines were not fully synchronized.
While the two converged near the end of the anneal, for
much of the time, the strength of the local ﬁelds for the
problem Hamiltonian was 2−3 GHz less than that of the
coupling strength for the problem Hamiltonian (Fig. 8).
The synchronization issue was ﬁxed by estimating the
time-dependence of the persistent current and modifying
the signal in annealing lines so as to compensate for the
eﬀect and make the weights on the coupling and local
ﬁelds uniform.
Fig. 9 shows results on directly mapped instances both
before and after the recalibration. While the recalibra-
tion improved results for problems other groups were run-
ning on the machine, it resulted in a substantial decrease
in performance on the directly mapped scheduling-type
planning problems, both in terms of the absolute total
annealing time and in the scaling, withα increasing from
0.6 to 1.0.
D. Performance dependence on the internal
coupling
We now turn to how the value of Jint aﬀects perfor-
mance for each of the three diﬀerent mappings. Naively,
8 10 12 14 16
Problem size n: number of tasks
Median Expected Total Anneal Time 
 to 99% success in microsecs.
10 1000 1e+05
Before calib:α=0.6±0.029
After calib: α=1.01±0.045
FIG. 9: Median expected total anneal time before and
after a recalibration. The performance on the directly
mapped scheduling-type planning problems decreased signiﬁ-
cantly after recalibration. Shown is the median expected total
anneal time for 99% percent success for Jint = 1.25 before the
recalibration, and the results for the bestJint after calibration
(same as in Fig. 3). The variability in the expected total an-
neal time across the 100 problems also increased, as illustrated
by the error bars at the 35th and 65th percentiles. While the
recalibration improved results for other problems run on the
machine, the reverse held for the planning problems we ran.
one might expect that one should set Jint as high as
possible, so as to penalize states in which the bit values
of the physical qubits representing one logical qubit dif-
fer, but there are reasons why setting it too high can be
detrimental [13]. The ﬁrst is that doing so can increase
the diﬃculty of transfering amplitude from a local mini-
mum in which all of the bit values for a component are
equal but set to the wrong value. The second is that the
device has a ﬁnite range of possible couplings, and suf-
fers from signiﬁcant precision issues, meaning that the
noise in the applied coupling strengths is high enough
that only about 16 diﬀerent values can be distinguished.
When an Ising problem is sent to the machine, the prob-
lem Hamiltonian is automatically rescaled so as to take
advantage of the full range. If Jint is set too high, how-
ever, when the problem is rescaled, all of the other ﬁeld
strengths become indistinguishable from 0, and all infor-
mation speciﬁc to the problem is lost. For these reasons,
there is a sweet spot for Jint.
For each mapping, a quick parameter sweep was done
(not shown) to locate the correct range in which to per-
form a more detailed evaluation. The tables in Fig. 10
give the median expected total anneal time for 99% per-
cent success over the benchmark problems under various
values of Jint for each of the three mappings, with cell
colorings determined from the success probabilities. The
table for the direct mapping shows that the optimal value
of Jint increases as the problem size and the component
size increase, likely because a higher value ofJint is useful
for pressuring all of the qubits in the larger components
to take on the same value by the end of the computa-
tion. The tables for the CNF and time-slice mapping are

=== PAGE BREAK ===

14
65 691
16 234
12 649
13 515
15 873
948 087
151 238
117 156
88 075
108 917
/Infinity
/Infinity
/Infinity
537 766
426 749
8 9 10
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
n
Jint
CNF mapping
5143
3495
4218
6059
7737
24 530
24 966
23 053
27 766
35 007
115 032
66 848
61 395
77 192
110 587
364 986
217 579
196 123
219 875
305 962
/Infinity
1 119 054
/Infinity
/Infinity
/Infinity
8 9 10 11 12
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
n
Jint
time/Minusslice mapping
42
44
42
48
57
49
54
73
86
108
210
205
199
229
273
818
623
532
550
655
4396
3503
1929
2136
2560
26 271
13 153
8463
6832
7507
75 559
20 613
13 708
11 349
12 028
777 120
78 794
67 129
45 927
59 552
/Infinity
162 471
82 024
63 255
68 279
8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
n
Jint
direct mapping
FIG. 10: Performance for diﬀerent values of Jint on the three diﬀerent mappings of scheduling-type planning
problems. The numbers are the median expected total anneal time for 99% percent success over the benchmark set of 100
hard but solvable scheduling-type problems of each size for diﬀerent values of Jint under the three mappings. The colors were
determined from the success probabilities, with each column normalized by the largest value for the given mapping and size.
Deep red indicates the largest value, with the colors ranging from orange to yellow to white indicating lower and lower success
probabilities.
less conclusive, particularly since only a handful of an-
neals resulted in a solution for the largest sizes (the last
column of each table), but they are consistent with this
trend. The time-slice instances beneﬁt from somewhat
higher values of Jint than the other two mappings. The
same trend was also found in [44].
E. Performance with a simple error correction
scheme
The simple error correction scheme of Sec.VI does not
provide signiﬁcant improvements in performance on these
problems under any of the mappings, as can be seen in
Fig. 11. The time-slice results suggest that error cor-
rection could provide more signiﬁcant improvements as
the problem size increases. The results on the directly
mapped instances, however, show no improvement with
error correction over the whole range of problem sizes.
The error correction scheme acts only on physical qubits
representing the same logical bit that end up taking on
opposite values. The reason for these opposite values is
likely that there are conﬂicting constraints with neigh-
boring values. For this reason, majority voting error cor-
rection at this level, while it removes any energy penalties
resulting from disagreements within the component, will
often increase the penalties from constraints involving
neighboring logical qubits.
VIII. RESULTS ON NAVIGATION-TYPE
PLANNING PROBLEMS
For both the CNF and time-slice mappings of problems
from the parametrized family of navigation-type plan-
ning problems, the largest problem size that embedded
was size 4. For the navigation-speciﬁc direct mapping,
problems of size 6 embedded reliably, but problems of
size 7 no longer embedded. We increased the number of
embedding tries, and even asked D-Wave to try to em-
bed these problems for us, but without success. Only
problems with fewer than 33 vertices are guaranteed to
embed in the 512 vertex (8 , 4)-Chimera graph, so these
49-qubit QUBOs may not embed in the current hard-
ware. While the directly mapped navigation-type plan-
ning problems have QUBO graphs that are far from fully-
connected - the number of edges in these graphs goes up
linearly with size not quadratically - they appear to be
suﬃciently connected that it may be impossible to em-
bed any size 7 navigation-type planning problem in the
current hardware. The next section explores embedding
these problems in larger architectures. For those prob-

=== PAGE BREAK ===

15
8 9 10 11 12
Problem size n: number of tasks
Median Expected Total Anneal Time 
 to 99% success in microsecs.
1000 10000 1e+05 1e+06 with EC: α=1.77±0.09
w/o EC: α=1.76±0.104
8 9 10 11 12
Problem size n: number of tasks
Median Expected Total Anneal Time 
 to 99% success in microsecs.
1000 10000 1e+05 1e+06 with EC: α=1.26±0.055
w/o EC: α=1.37±0.087
8 10 12 14 16
Problem size n: number of tasks
Median Expected Total Anneal Time 
 to 99% success in microsecs.
10 1000 1e+05
with EC: α=1.01±0.041
w/o EC:  α=1.01±0.045
FIG. 11: Comparison of performance with and with-
out simple error correction on the three mappings of
scheduling-type planning problems. Median expected
total anneal time for 99% percent success for each mapping,
with the best Jint for each size, are shown. CNF mapping
(Top): In the corrected case, Jint was{1.6, 1.5, 1.7, 1.5, 1.6}
for problem sizes {8, 9, 10, 11, 12} respectively. For the un-
corrected case, Jint was {1.6, 1.7, 1.7, 1.7, 1.6} respectively.
Time-slice mapping (Middle): In the corrected case, Jint
was {1.2, 1.3, 1.3} for problem sizes {8, 9, 10} respectively.
For the uncorrected case, Jint was {1.2, 1.3, 1.4} respec-
tively. Direct mapping (Bottom): In the corrected case, Jint
was {1.1, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.3, 1.4, 1.4, 1.4, 1.4} for problem sizes
{8, . . . ,12} respectively. For the uncorrected case, Jint was
{1.1, 1.1, 1.3, 1.3, 1.3, 1.4, 1.4, 1.4, 1.4} respectively.
lems that did embed, the D-Wave machine solved them
reliably and quickly.
IX. EMBEDDING IN FUTURE
ARCHITECTURES
We investigated the embeddability of the most embed-
dable graph, the graph corresponding to the direct map-
ping to QUBO of the trivial Hamiltonian path problem
on the fully connected graph Kn of size n. This graph,
which we call the intersecting-cliques graphIC n,n for rea-
sons that will become apparent shortly, is a subgraph of
all the directly mapped navigation problems of its size
(and larger) so if this one doesn’t embed, none of the
others will. The graph is far from fully connected, each
of the n2 vertices having degree only 2( n− 1), but the
degree does grow in linearly with the size of the prob-
lem. The n2 vertices in the graph can be partitioned
into a set of n cliques each containing n vertices in two
diﬀerent ways. The ﬁrst clique partition corresponds to
the QUBO term enforcing the condition that each site is
visited exactly once, and the second to the QUBO term
enforcing the condition that only one site is visited at
a time. The n vertices in any one of the cliques in the
ﬁrst set are all in diﬀerent cliques of the second set. This
property inspired the name. Diagram of IC5,5 andIC3,3
are shown in Fig. 12.
We investigated the embeddability of these problems
in potential future architectures, speciﬁcally ( M,L )-
Chimera graphs 13 in which either the number of unit
cells M2 or the size of the unit cell KL,L is increased,
or both. A deterministic algorithm [27] provides an em-
bedding of any graph with no more than ML + 1 ver-
tices in an ( M,L )-Chimera graph, but for graphs that
are far from fully connected, this algorithm is usually
quite ineﬃcient in the number of qubits used, and in
practice many graphs can embed in a smaller Chimera
graph than is found by this algorithm. In particular,
D-Wave’s heuristic embedding software often ﬁnds more
eﬃcient embeddings.
To investigate the embeddability of these problems
in future architectures, we ran D-Wave’s heuristic em-
bedding software 11 times per problem on each ( M,L )-
Chimera graph architecture. The heuristic embedding
software was run with default parameters, including up
to 10 restarts if an embedding is not found on a given
try. We recorded the 11 embedding sizes we obtained.
Fig. 14 shows the minimum embedding size for archi-
tectures in which the size of the unit cell KL,L remains
constant with L remaining at its current value of L = 4,
but the number of unit cells is increased. As can be seen
in the ﬁgure, increasing the number of unit cells, while
retaining the current size of the unit cells (L = 4), hardly
improves the size of the embeddings of problems that em-
beddeded in smaller architectures, but does extend the
problem size that embeds somewhat.
Fig. 15 shows the minimum embedding size for archi-

=== PAGE BREAK ===

16
1,1
1,2
1,3
1,4
1,5
2,1
2,2
2,3
2,4
2,5
3,1
3,2
3,3
3,4
3,5
4,1
4,2
4,3
4,4
4,5
5,1
5,2
5,3
5,4
5,5
1,1
1,2
1,3
2,1
2,2
2,33,1
3,2
3,3
FIG. 12: The intersecting-cliques graphs IC5,5 and
IC3,3. The intersecting-cliques graph IC n,n is a subgraph
of all navigation-type problems with n or more sites. It corre-
sponds to the trivial navigation-type problem in which every
site is connected directly to every other site. It is the most
embeddable of the navigation-type problems, meaning that if
it does not embed then neither will any of the other problems
with the same number of sites (or more).
tectures in which the size of the unit cellKL,L is increased
while the number of unit cells stays constant at its current
valueM2 = 64. As can be seen in the ﬁgure, increasing
the size of the unit cells, and thus increasing the local
connectivity of the graph, even while the number of unit
cells constant, signiﬁcantly improves the embedding size
and the embeddability of these problems.
Fig. 16 explores the embeddability of IC k,k for k ∈
FIG. 13: The (3, 4)-Chimera graph. A schematic diagram
from [42] of the ( M, L)-Chimera graph underlying D-Wave’s
architecture. In the (3 , 4)-Chimera graph shown, there are
M2 = 9 unit cells, each of which is a fully-connected bipartite
graph K4,4 containing 2L qubits. The qubits in the left col-
umn of each unit cell are connected to the analogous qubits in
the unit cells above and below (add or subtract M L = 24 to
the index) and the qubits in the right column of each unit cell
are connected to the analogous qubits in the unit cells to the
right and left (add or subtract 2 L = 8 to the index). The D-
Wave Two used in the experiments has a (8, 4)-Chimera graph
architecture, but with 3 broken qubits that are not used.
{7, 8, 9, 10} for the full range of architectures with M∈
{8,..., 16} and L∈{ 4,..., 10}. The embedding soft-
ware runs in seconds for problem sizes less than 7, but
increases rapidly after that, with the 11 embedding trials
taking 30− 45 minutes for some of the larger problem
sizes. For this reason, we did not explore problem sizes
larger than 10.
By the end of 2014, a 1024 qubit D-Wave machine
should be available at NASA, and sometime in 2015,
a 2048 machine should be available. Unfortunately, if
these qubit numbers are achieved by simply increasing
the number of unit cells, rather than increasing the con-
nectivity of the unit cells, or moving to a diﬀerent archi-
tecture altogether, it looks likely that only navigation-
type planning problems of size less than 10 will be able to
be run on such machines due to the diﬃculty embedding
larger instances in these hardware graphs. Alternative
embedding strategies could improve these results, but
in the near-term, scheduling-type planning problems ap-
pear more suitable than navigation-type planning prob-
lems for these near-term Chimera architectures withK4,4
unit cell. For real world planning applications that com-
bine both navigation and scheduling aspects, the design
of new hardware architectures that will overcome the

=== PAGE BREAK ===

17
0 
200 
400 
600 
800 
1000 
1200 
1400 
1600 
1800 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Minimum embedding size 
Problem size 
Minimum embedding size (L=4) 
M=8 
M=9 
M=10 
M=11 
M=12 
M=13 
M=14 
M=15 
M=16 
FIG. 14: IC k,k embedding sizes with increasing number
of K4,4 unit cells. The embedding sizes of the intersecting-
cliques graph IC k,k for k≤ 10 in ( M, 4)-Chimera graphs for
M∈{ 8, . . . ,}. Increasing the number of unit cells, M2, does
little to improve the embedding sizes of graphs that embedded
in a smaller architecture, but does extend somewhat the range
of k over which IC k,k embeds reliably within 11 runs of the D-
Wave heuristic embedding software with default parameters.
The points for sizes 0 and 1 were put in manually. The rest
reﬂect runs of D-Wave’s heuristic embedding software.
0 
200 
400 
600 
800 
1000 
1200 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Minimum embedding size 
Problem size 
Minimum embedding size (M=8) 
L=4 
L=5 
L=6 
L=7 
L=8 
L=9 
L=10 
FIG. 15: IC k,k embedding sizes with increasing unit
cell size. The embedding sizes of the intersecting-cliques
graph IC k,k for k ≤ 10 in (8 , L)-Chimera graphs for L ∈
{4, . . . ,10}. Increasing the size of the KL,L unit cells, and
thereby the local connectivity of the hardware graph, while
keeping the number of unit cells constant, enables improved
embedding sizes of graphs that embedded in a smaller archi-
tecture, as well as extending the range of k for which IC k,k
embeds reliably.
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
8 10 12 14 16 
L 
M 
Embedded up to N=6 
Embedded up to N=7 
Embedded up to N=8 
Embedded up to N=9 
Embedded for N=0-10 
FIG. 16: Embedding of IC k,k graphs in (M, L)-Chimera
graphs. Embedding of IC k,k for k≤ 10 in ( M, L)-Chimera
graphs for M∈{ 8, . . . ,16} and L∈{ 4, . . . ,8}. Dots show the
largest size problem which embedded in the given architecture
in 11 runs of the D-Wave heuristic embedding software with
default parameters. Crosses indicate that the next largest
size problem (n = 11) was not run, so we do not have data to
indicate whether or not it would have embedded in the given
Chimera architecture.
programming bottleneck presented by embedding these
problems is critical.
While the scheduling-type planning problems embed
better than the navigation-type planning problems, for
both of the general mappings, by around problem size 15
or 16, the heuristic embedding software has diﬃculty em-
bedding these problems. For the direct map instances,
the heuristic embedding software had no problems em-
bedding instances up to problem size 17, begins to have
occasional diﬃculties at problem size 18, and has serious
diﬃculties embedding most of the problems by size 22.
We ﬁnish the discussion of embedding in future archi-
tectures with an analysis of the embeddability of the sim-
plest solvable scheduling-type planning problem, the one
that corresponds to a completely disconnected graph of
n vertices. As in the navigation case, its QUBO graph is
a subgraph of the QUBO graph for all of the scheduling-
type problems, so if it doesn’t embed, none will. The
analysis is easier than in the navigation case, and can
be done by hand. The QUBO graph consists of n tri-
angles (we are considering the 3 time slot case). Since
k triangles can embed in a K2k,2k unit cell, an (M, 2k)-
Chimera architecture supports the embedding of the sim-
plestkM 2-task problem. Since 4 vertices are required to
embed a triangle in Chimera graph architecture, this em-
bedding is optimal. As an example, the simplest problem
with 128 tasks embeds in a 512 qubit machine, and the
512 task problem embeds in the 2048 machine projected
for 2015. In addition, preliminary tests show that typical
scheduling-type problems of size well past 50 will embed
in the 2048 architecture.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

18
X. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We have studied the eﬀectiveness of a quantum an-
nealer in solving small instances within families of hard
operational planning problems under various mappings
and embeddings. From these results we derive insights
useful for the programming and design of future quan-
tum annealers: problem choice, the mapping used, prop-
erties of the embedding, and annealing proﬁle all mat-
ter, each signiﬁcantly aﬀecting the performance. While
this initial study did not produce results competitive
with state-of-the-art classical approaches, higher quality
qubits, shorter annealing times, better precision, greater
hardware connectivity, improved mappings and embed-
dings, and alternative annealing proﬁles will all con-
tribute to improved results.
In future work, we will experiment with other map-
pings, including experimenting with diﬀerent weightings
of penalty terms in the QUBO funtion and other transla-
tions of the problem to CNF form, and also other prob-
lems from operational planning, such as job shop schedul-
ing. We will also build on this work, exploring more em-
beddings per problem to sort out how much of the vari-
ation in runtime is due to the variation in the diﬃculty
of the problems themselves versus how much is due to
properties of the embedding independent of the problem.
We will perform statistical analysis of the correlation be-
tween a richer set of embedding properties and expected
total annealing time in order to give insight into better
metrics for evaluating embeddings of QUBO problems for
quantum annealing.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Jeremy Frank, Alejandro
Perdomo-Ortiz, Ross Beyer, Sergey Knysh, Chris Henze,
and Itay Hen for helpful discussions, and to DWave for
technical support and for discussions related to the cali-
bration issue and our results before and after.
[1] Achlioptas, D. and Friedgut, E. (1999). A sharp threshold
for k-colorability. Random Structures and Algorithms ,
14(1):63–70.
[2] Achlioptas, D. and Moore, C. (2003). Almost all graphs
with average degree 4 are 3-colorable. Journal of Com-
puter and System Sciences , 67(2):441–471.
[3] Babbush, R., Love, P. J., and Aspuru-Guzik, A. (2013a).
Adiabatic quantum simulation of quantum chemistry.
arXiv:1311.3967.
[4] Babbush, R., O’Gorman, B., and Aspuru-Guzik, A.
(2013b). Resource eﬃcient gadgets for compiling adi-
abatic quantum optimization problems. Annalen der
Physik, 525(10-11):877–888.
[5] Babbush, R., Perdomo-Ortiz, A., O’Gorman, B.,
Macready, W., and Aspuru-Guzik, A. (2012). Construc-
tion of energy functions for lattice heteropolymer models:
A case study in constraint satisfaction programming and
adiabatic quantum optimization. arXiv:1211.3422.
[6] Blum, A. and Furst, M. (1997). Planning through
planning graph analysis. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Journal ,
90:281–330.
[7] Boixo, S., Albash, T., Spedalieri, F. M., Chancellor, N.,
and Lidar, D. A. (2013). Experimental signature of pro-
grammable quantum annealing. Nature communications,
4.
[8] Boixo, S., Rønnow, T. F., Isakov, S. V., Wang, Z.,
Wecker, D., Lidar, D. A., Martinis, J. M., and Troyer,
M. (2014). Evidence for quantum annealing with more
than one hundred qubits. Nature Physics, 10(3):218–224.
[9] Boros, E. and Hammer, P. L. (2002). Pseudo-boolean
optimization. Discrete applied mathematics, 123(1):155–
225.
[10] Cai, J., Macready, B., and Roy, A. (2014). A practical
heuristic for ﬁnding graph minors. arXiv:1406:2741.
[11] Cheeseman, P., Kanefsky, B., and Taylor, W. M. (1991).
Where the really hard problems are. In IJCAI, vol-
ume 91, pages 331–337.
[12] Chien, S., Johnston, M., Frank, J., Giuliano, M., Kave-
laars, A., Lenzen, C., Policella, N., and Verfailie, G.
(2012). A generalized timeline representation, services,
and interface for automating space mission operations.
In 12th International Conference on Space Operations .
[13] Choi, V. (2008). Minor-embedding in adiabatic quantum
computation: I. the parameter setting problem. Quan-
tum Information Processing, 7(5):193–209.
[14] Coja-Oghlan, A. (2013). Upper-bounding the
k-colorability threshold by counting covers.
arXiv:1305.0177.
[15] Culberson, J., Beacham, A., and Papp, D. (1995). Hid-
ing our colors. In Proceedings of the CP95 Workshop on
Studying and Solving Really Hard Problems, pages 31–42.
[16] Das, A. and Chakrabarti, B. K. (2008). Colloquium:
Quantum annealing and analog quantum computation.
Rev. Mod. Phys., 80:1061–1081.
[17] Dubois, O. and Mandler, J. (2002). On the non-3-
colourability of random graphs. arXiv:math/0209087.
[18] Farhi, E., Goldstone, J., Gutmann, S., and Sipser, M.
(2000). Quantum computation by adiabatic evolution.
arXiv:quant-ph/0001106.
[19] Fikes, R. E. and Nilsson, N. J. (1972). STRIPS: A new
approach to the application of theorem proving to prob-
lem solving. Artiﬁcial intelligence, 2(3):189–208.
[20] Ghallab, M., Nau, D., and Traverso, P. (2004). Auto-
mated planning: theory & practice . Elsevier.
[21] Helmert, M. (2003). Complexity results for standard
benchmark domains in planning. Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Journal, pages 219–262.
[22] Hoﬀmann, J. (2005). Where ignoring delete lists works:
Local search topology in planning benchmarks. Journal
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research , 24:685–758.
[23] Johnson, M., Amin, M., Gildert, S., Lanting, T., Hamze,
F., Dickson, N., Harris, R., Berkley, A., Johansson, J.,
Bunyk, P., et al. (2011a). Quantum annealing with man-
ufactured spins. Nature, 473(7346):194–198.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

19
[24] Johnson, M. W., Amin, M. H. S., Gildert, S., and et al.
(2011b). Quantum annealing with manufactured spins.
Nature, 473:194–198.
[25] Kassal, I., Whitﬁeld, J. D., Perdomo-Ortiz, A., Yung, M.-
H., and Aspuru-Guzik, A. (2010). Simulating chemistry
using quantum computers. arXiv:1007.2648.
[26] Kautz, H. (2004). Satplan04: Planning as satisﬁabil-
ity. Working Notes on the Fourth International Planning
Competition (IPC-2004), pages 44–45.
[27] Klymko, C., Sullivan, B. D., and Humble, T. S. (2014).
Adiabatic quantum programming: minor embedding
with hard faults. Quantum information processing ,
13(3):709–729.
[28] Koml´ os, J. and Szemer´ edi, E. (1983). Limit distribu-
tion for the existence of Hamiltonian cycles in a random
graph. Discrete Mathematics, 43(1):55–63.
[29] Long, D. and Fox, M. (2003). The 3rd international plan-
ning competition: Results and analysis. J. Artif. Intell.
Res.(JAIR), 20:1–59.
[30] Lucas, A. (2013). Ising formulations of many NP prob-
lems. arXiv:1302.5843.
[31] Nielsen, M. and Chuang, I. L. (2001). Quantum Com-
puting and Quantum Information . Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
[32] O’Gorman, B., Perdomo-Ortiz, A., Babbush, R.,
Aspuru-Guzik, A., and Smelyanskiy, V. (2014). Bayesian
network structure learning using quantum annealing. In
submission.
[33] Perdomo-Ortiz, A., Dickson, N., Drew-Brook, M., Rose,
G., and Aspuru-Guzik, A. (2012). Finding low-energy
conformations of lattice protein models by quantum an-
nealing. Scientiﬁc reports, 2.
[34] Perdomo-Ortiz, A., Fluegemann, J., , Narasimhan, S.,
Smelyanskiy, V., and Biswas, R. (2014a). A quantum ap-
proach to diagnosis of multiple faults in electrical power
systems. 5th IEEE international Conference on Space
Mission Challenges for Information Technology. [To ap-
pear.].
[35] Perdomo-Ortiz, A., Fluegemann, J., Narasimhan, S.,
Biswas, R., and Smelyanskiy, V. (2014b). Programming
and solving real-world applications on a quantum anneal-
ing device. arXiv:1406.7601.
[36] Pudenz, K. L., Albash, T., and Lidar, D. A. (2014).
Error-corrected quantum annealing with hundreds of
qubits.
[37] Rieﬀel, E. G. and Polak, W. (2011). A Gentle Intro-
duction to Quantum Computing . MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.
[38] Rieﬀel, E. G., Venturelli, D., Hen, I., Do, M., and
Frank, J. (2014). Parametrized families of hard plan-
ning problems from phase transitions. Proceedings of
the Twenty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence (AAAI-14)[To appear].
[39] Rønnow, T. F., Wang, Z., Job, J., Boixo, S., Isakov,
S. V., Wecker, D., Martinis, J. M., Lidar, D. A., and
Troyer, M. (2014). Deﬁning and detecting quantum
speedup. arXiv:1401.2910.
[40] Shin, S. W., Smith, G., Smolin, J. A., and Vazirani, U.
(2014a). Comment on “Distinguishing classical and quan-
tum models for the D-Wave device”. arXiv:1404.6499.
[41] Shin, S. W., Smith, G., Smolin, J. A., and Vazirani,
U. (2014b). How “quantum” is the D-Wave machine?
arXiv:1401.7087.
[42] Smelyanskiy, V. N., Rieﬀel, E. G., Knysh, S. I., Williams,
C. P., Johnson, M. W., Thom, M. C., Macready, W. G.,
and Pudenz, K. L. (2012). A near-term quantum comput-
ing approach for hard computational problems in space
exploration. arXiv:1204.2821.
[43] Smolin, J. A. and Smith, G. (2013). Classical signature
of quantum annealing. arXiv:1305.4904.
[44] Venturelli, D., Mandra, S., Knysh, S., OGorman, B.,
Biswas, R., and Smelyanskiy, V. (2014). Quantum opti-
mization of fully-connected spin glasses. arXiv:1406.7553.
[45] Vinci, W., Albash, T., Mishra, A., Warburton, P. A., and
Lidar, D. A. (2014). Distinguishing classical and quan-
tum models for the D-Wave device. arXiv:1403.4228.
[46] Wang, L., Rønnow, T. F., Boixo, S., Isakov, S. V., Wang,
Z., Wecker, D., Lidar, D. A., Martinis, J. M., and Troyer,
M. (2013a). Comment on “Classical signature of quan-
tum annealing”.
[47] Wang, Z., Boixo, S., Albash, T., and Lidar, D. (2013b).
Benchmarking the D-Wave adiabatic quantum optimizer
via 2D-Ising spin glasses. In APS Meeting Abstracts, vol-
ume 1, page 27005.
[48] Wang, Z., Job, J., Isakov, S. V., Boixo, S., Lidar, D.,
Martinis, J., Troyer, M., et al. (2014a). Probing for quan-
tum speedup on D-Wave Two. Bulletin of the American
Physical Society.
[49] Wang, Z., Job, J., Troyer, M., Lidar, D. A., et al.
(2014b). Performance of quantum annealing on random
Ising problems implemented using the D-Wave Two.Bul-
letin of the American Physical Society .