A Hybrid Classical Quantum Computing Approach
to the Satellite Mission Planning Problem
Nils Quetschlich∗ Vincent Koch† Lukas Burgholzer∗ Robert Wille∗‡
∗Chair for Design Automation, Technical University of Munich, Germany
†Technical University of Munich, Germany
‡Software Competence Center Hagenberg GmbH (SCCH), Austria
nils.quetschlich@tum.de v.koch@tum.de lukas.burgholzer@tum.de robert.wille@tum.de
https://www.cda.cit.tum.de/research/quantum
Abstract—Hundreds of satellites equipped with cameras orbit
the Earth to capture images from locations for various purposes.
Since the field of view of the cameras is usually very narrow,
the optics have to be adjusted and rotated between single shots
of different locations. This is even further complicated by the
fixed speed—determined by the satellite’s altitude—such that
the decision what locations to select for imaging becomes even
more complex. Therefore, classical algorithms for this Satellite
Mission Planning Problem (SMPP) have already been proposed
decades ago. However, corresponding classical solutions have only
seen evolutionary enhancements since then. Quantum computing
and its promises, on the other hand, provide the potential for
revolutionary improvement. Therefore, in this work, we propose
a hybrid classical quantum computing approach to solve the
SMPP combining the advantages of quantum hardware with
decades of classical optimizer development. Using the V ariational
Quantum Eigensolver (VQE), Quantum Approximate Optimization
Algorithm (QAOA), and its warm-start variant (W-QAOA), we
demonstrate the applicability of solving the SMPP for up to 21
locations to choose from. This proof-of-concept—which is avail-
able on GitHub (https://github.com/cda-tum/mqt-problemsolver)
as part of the Munich Quantum T oolkit (MQT)—showcases the
potential of quantum computing in this application domain and
represents a first step toward competing with classical algorithms
in the future.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Satellites orbiting the Earth have become a critical tool for a
wide range of applications, including environmental monitor-
ing, navigation, as well as communication. These satellites are
usually equipped with cameras to capture images of the Earth’s
surface. However, this comes with a significant challenge:
Satellites have limited time and resources to capture images,
and decisions must be made what areas of the Earth to cover—
requiring sophisticated algorithms to efficiently and effectively
allocate resources and plan the routing of the satellite.
This Satellite Mission Planning Problem (SMPP) is a com-
putationally challenging combinatorial optimization problem
that involves scheduling satellite resources to obtain images
of the Earth’s surface. So far, the SMPP has been ap-
proached by utilizing classical algorithms—both using heuris-
tics (e.g., simulated annealing and tabu search [1]) and
exact approaches (e.g., linear integer programming [2] or
branch-and-bound [3]). While these works have already been
proposed decades ago, more recent papers propose extensions
of the SMPP focusing on additionally objectives, e.g., consid-
ering also transmission tasks [4] or multiple satellites [5], [6].
Although a wide range of classical approaches for the SMPP
and related problems have been developed, their potential for
further improvements is rather small—especially, because the
classical computing hardware development has shifted from
revolutionary enhancements decades ago toward rather small,
incremental enhancements.
Quantum computing, on the contrary, has provided tremen-
dous improvements especially in recent years—both in soft-
ware and hardware. Meanwhile, dedicated workflows such as
those proposed in [7], [8] are available that allow solving prob-
lems that are computationally hard for classical algorithms.
Especially, hybrid classical quantum algorithms which com-
bine classical and quantum computing have shown promising
results in solving various problems, such as in finance [9],
optimization [10], chemistry [11], and physics [12]. Even a
quantum annealing approach to solve the SMPP has already
been proposed in [13].
In this paper, we propose a hybrid classical quantum ap-
proach for the SMPP. Therefore, the problem is formulated
as a Quadratic Unconstraint Binary Optimization (QUBO)
problem and encoded into a quantum circuit based on the
Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE, [14]), the Quantum
Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA, [15]), and its
warm-start variant (W-QAOA, [16]). The resulting circuits
are then executed on a noise-free and a noise-aware quantum
simulator. Evaluations show that the proposed approach can
solve the SMPP for up to 21 possible images in reasonable
time with often (close-to) optimal results—demonstrating the
potential quantum computing offers in this application domain.
All implementations are available on GitHub (https://github.
com/cda-tum/mqt-problemsolver) as part of the Munich Quan-
tum Toolkit (MQT). Combined with the anticipated trend of
improvements for both quantum hardware and software, this
approach may become a serious competitor for the currently
used classical solvers in the future.
The remainder of this work is structured as follows. Sec-
tion II reviews the SMPP in more detail and describes the
hybrid classical quantum approach proposed in this work.
The applicability of the resulting solution has been confirmed
by experimental evaluations whose results are summarized in
Section III. Finally, Section IV discusses the lessons learned
before the paper is concluded in Section V.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Earth
×
A/2
×
B/7
×
C/3
×
D/2
×
E/6
Fig. 1: Satellite Mission Planning Problem.
II. S ATELLITE MISSION PLANNING PROBLEM :
HYBRID CLASSICAL QUANTUM APPROACH
In this section, the SMPP is described and formulated
based on a more comprehensive problem description proposed
in [13]. Thereafter, all the steps required to derive a quantum
computing-based solution are described.
A. Problem Description
The Satellite Mission Planning Problem (SMPP) refers to
the complex task of selecting a subset of feasible locations
from a pre-determined list of locations to-be-captured by a
satellite. Each captured location is associated with a value.
As a result of the narrow field of view of the satellite, its
optics have to be adjusted and rotated between single shots
of different locations—resulting in a time-consuming process
referred to as “rotation time”. This is even further complicated
by the fixed speed of the satellite (determined by the satellite’s
altitude) which leads to a fixed “transition time” between the
capture positions of locations (for the sake of simplification,
it is assumed that each location can only be captured when
the satellite is at its closest distance).
Example 1. Assume that an imaging satellite orbits the Earth
at a given altitude with constant speed as depicted in Fig. 1 in
black. In this setup, five to-be-captured locations are given—
denoted by A to E with their respective associated value
if captured. The goal is to determine a feasible subset of
locations that maximizes the sum of their associated values.
In this example, there are two infeasible pairs of locations
(A/B and B/C) for which the rotation time is larger than
the transition time. Consequently, A and C or only B can be
selected in addition to D and E, which are feasible in both
cases. Since the associated value of B is higher than both A’s
andC’s values combined, the optimal selection is {B,D,E}.
More formally, the SMPP can be described as a binary
constrained optimization problem:
max
x∈{0,1}n
nX
i=1
xivi with (1)
R(i,j )≤T (i,j ) if xi =xj = 1
with
• x being the vector of binary variables xi representing
whether a location i has been selected for imaging at its
respective capture position si on the satellite orbit,
• vi being the associated value of a captured location i,
• R(i,j ) being the required rotation time between two
locations defined by the necessary satellite optics rotation
time between angle ai at satellite position si and angle
aj at position sj divided by the constant optics rotation
speed vr: |ai−aj|
vr
, and
• T (i,j ) being the transition time between two capture
positionssi andsj divided by satellite speed vs: |si−sj|
vs
.
To derive a quantum computing-based solution to this prob-
lem, the general workflow proposed in [7] is followed: First, a
suitable quantum algorithm is selected based on the problem
to be solved. Subsequently, the problem must be encoded
into a quantum circuit based on that selected algorithm. This
quantum circuit is then executed and the resulting histogram
is decoded to extract the actual problem solution.
B. Quantum Algorithm Selection
The currently available quantum algorithms can be classified
into two categories. The first class, referred to as pure quantum
algorithms, has been proven to outperform its classical counter
parts, such as Shor’s [17] for factorization, Grover’s [18] for
unsorted database search, as well as the Harrow-Hassadim-
Lloyd (HHL, [19]) algorithm for solving linear systems
of equations. However, these algorithms generally assume
close-to perfect quantum hardware which is not yet available
to the necessary extent.
Hybrid classical quantum algorithms or the so-called Vari-
ational Quantum Algorithms (VQAs) are the second class
of quantum algorithms. Prominent representatives are the
Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE, [14]) to determine
the ground state of a given physical system and the Quantum
Approximation Optimization Algorithm (QAOA, [15]) used for
various optimization problems. In contrast to pure quantum
algorithms, the requirements regarding the quality of quantum
hardware are less strict and, hence, these algorithms are
frequently applied in the current Noisy-Intermediate-Scale-
Quantum (NISQ, [20]) era. The general idea behind VQAs
is to encode a given problem into a parameterized quantum
circuit and utilize a classical optimizer to determine the most
suitable parameter values so that the resulting quantum circuit
allows one to determine the solution to the given problem.
To also apply VQAs to the SMPP, the constrained binary
problem must be re-formulated to be of the form of a
Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization (QUBO) prob-
lem since that is the common input format for VQAs. There-
fore, a penalty term is introduced to substitute the condition
to be satisfied in the binary constrained optimization problem
formulation in Equation 1. This leads to
max
x∈{0,1}n
nX
i=1
xivi−p·
n−1X
i=1
nX
j=i
xixj·c(i,j ) (2)
with
• p being the penalty value that enforces the constraints to
be satisfied and
• c(i,j ) being a pre-calculated Boolean variable which is
1 if R(i,j )>T (i,j ) and 0 otherwise.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

A
B
C
D
E
Init
RY (θ0)
RY (θ1)
RY (θ2)
RY (θ3)
RY (θ4)
×r Repetitions
Entanglement Layer Rotation Layer
RY (θ5+i·5)
RY (θ6+i·5)
RY (θ7+i·5)
RY (θ8+i·5)
RY (θ9+i·5)
Fig. 2: SMPP encoded using VQE.
Using this QUBO formulation, VQAs can be utilized to
solve the SMPP.
C. Encoding as a Quantum Circuit
How a QUBO is translated into a quantum circuit depends
on the selected quantum algorithm and the respective encoding
of the problem formulation—stating a whole research area on
its own with overviews given in [21]–[23]. For the SMPP,
we used VQE, QAOA, and its warm-start variant W-QAOA
to determine a feasible subset of locations from all possible
ones with each location encoded by one respective qubit. The
underlying circuit structures of those algorithms are described
in the following.
The general quantum circuit structure of VQE is
problem-independent and various ansatz functions are avail-
able. Here, a RealAmplitudes1 ansatz with reverse linear entan-
glement has been chosen and is depicted in Fig. 2. It consists
of the following building blocks:
• Init: A layer of parameterized single-qubit rotations.
• Entanglement Layer: The reverse linear entanglement
ansatz is implemented based on a sequence of CNOT
gates.
• Rotation Layer: Every repetition ends with another layer
of single-qubit rotations implemented using RY gates.
Each gate comes with its own rotation angle parameter.
Both the entanglement and rotation layers are repeated for r
repetitions while the index i denotes the ith repetition.
The quantum circuit structure of QAOA comes with a
significant difference: it is problem-dependent and consists of
three building blocks as depicted in Fig. 3:
• State Preparation: Creates a superposition state of all
qubits by applying Hadamard gates denoted by H.
• Cost Layer: Defines the SMPP instance by encoding
weight factors into RZ gates and infeasible location
pairs as RZZ gates as depicted for the problem instance
described in Example 1. Thoseθ andγ factors are defined
by the SMPP model describing its locations values and
feasibility constraints among each other 2.
1For details, see the Qiskit documentation at https://qiskit.org/
documentation/stubs/qiskit.circuit.library.RealAmplitudes.html.
2Note, that the θ and γ are pre-determined before αi and βi are optimized
by transforming the QUBO problem into an Ising Hamiltonian—e.g., by using
respective SDKs, such as Qiskit [24].
A
B
C
D
E
State Prep.
H
H
H
H
H
×r Repetitions
Cost Layer
Weight Factor
RZ(θA· 2αi)
RZ(θB· 2αi)
RZ(θC· 2αi)
RZ(θD· 2αi)
RZ(θE· 2αi)
γ· 2αi
γ· 2αi
Mixer Layer
RX (2βi)
RX (2βi)
RX (2βi)
RX (2βi)
RX (2βi)
Fig. 3: SMPP encoded using QAOA.
• Mixer Layer: Enables the algorithm to theoretically be
able to find the optimal parameter values and, therewith,
a solution to the SMPP.
Again, both the cost and the mixer layers are repeated for
arbitrarily many repetitionsr withi denoting theith repetition.
The resulting quantum circuits are both now capable of
determining the SMPP solution in combination with a classical
optimizer which is used for tuning the parameter toward an
optimal solution. For that, their values can either be randomly
initialized or, at least for QAOA, be pre-determined using its
warm-start variant (W-QAOA, [16]).
D. Execution
While the generated quantum circuit could immediately be
executed on a quantum simulator, the execution on the quan-
tum device requires the quantum circuit to be compiled accord-
ingly. Each quantum device induces constraints on the to-be-
executed quantum circuit such as on the supported elementary
quantum gates and, often, additionally on the connectivity of
qubits. Various software tools have been proposed to automate
the compilation in, e.g., [25], [26]. Thereafter, the quantum
circuit is ready to be executed—resulting in a distribution
of outcomes, also called a histogram, which comprises the
determined solution. To extract it, the histogram must be
decoded so that the actual solution is extracted. Although
this step marks the end of the workflow for pure quantum
algorithms, this differs for VQAs.
Here, as sketched in Fig. 4, the decoded solution is used
to determine a Cost value which depends on the chosen
parameter values of the parameterized quantum circuit and
the problem itself.
A
B
C
D
E
Parameterized Quantum Circuit
with Parameters ω
Classical
Optimizer
ω′
Cost(ω)
Fig. 4: VQA execution scheme.
This is also what enables VQE to determine solutions while
the problem is not represented in the quantum circuit itself.
The classical optimizer then adjusts the parameter values to
evaluate their influence in the next iteration. With many of
such iterations, the parameter values ideally converge to their
optimal value. When this is the case, the algorithm terminates
and the decoded solution of the quantum circuit executed with
the optimal parameters is returned.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21
Number of Locations
100
101
102
103
104
Calculation Time [s]
VQE
QAOA
W-QAOA
(a) Calculation time for SMPP instances.
3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21
Number of Locations
0.800
0.825
0.850
0.875
0.900
0.925
0.950
0.975
1.000Result Quality
VQE
QAOA
W-QAOA (b) Result quality for SMPP instances.
Fig. 5: Experimental evaluation for the satellite use-case using a noise-free simulation.
III. E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
In the following, the applicability of quantum computing
to the SMPP is demonstrated. To this end, we first describe
the evaluation setup and the problem instances considered.
Subsequently, the results based on noise-free and noise-aware
simulations are presented and discussed.
A. Setup
All implementations have been carried out using Qiskit [24]
(v0.41.1) in Python and are available on GitHub (https://
github.com/cda-tum/mqt-problemsolver) as part of the Munich
Quantum Toolkit (MQT). To evaluate the proposed approach,
SMPP instances from 3 up to 21 to-be-captured locations have
been solved using VQE, QAOA, and W-QAOA in a noise-free
simulation and up to 14 locatins in a noise-aware one. The
problem instances themselves are generated as follows: Each
image location is randomly placed with an arbitrary longitude
while the latitude is restricted to be between −15 and 15
degrees (since the satellite is assumed to orbit around the
equator and this condition ensures that each location is visible
to the satellite) and is assigned a value of either 1 or 2.
For both, the noise-free and the noise-aware simulation,
Cobyla is used as the classical optimizer. The maximal it-
erations are set to 100 for both optimizers in all evaluations.
All VQAs are evaluated using 3 repetitions each. For VQE,
a RealAmplitudes ansatz with reverse linear entanglement has
been chosen.
To evaluate both the noise-free and the noise-aware simu-
lations, the calculation time and result quality are evaluated.
B. Noise-free Simulation
Each problem instance is executed three times per algorithm
and both the calculation time and the result quality are aver-
aged to be more representative. All simulations are conducted
using Qiskit’s matrix-vector-based Sampler simulator. The re-
sulting computation times for all three algorithms are provided
in Fig. 5a. As expected, the computation time quickly increases
with the number of locations and shows an exponential trend
(represented by the linear slope on a logarithmic scale) while
VQE was significantly faster for smaller problem instances.
The respective result quality is shown in Fig. 5b. To this
end, a classical computation of the optimal solution and the
corresponding value is performed, which is then used as a
baseline to measure the relative deviation of the VQAs—e.g.,
a result quality of 0.95 corresponds to a location selection
which leads to an assigned accumulated value of 95% of the
optimal one.
In general, there is a clear trend of degrading result quality
with an increasing number of locations. Until around 12
locations, all algorithms have been able to determine the
(close-to) optimal results with a result quality of > 90%. From
there on, a notable decrease in result quality is occurring with
VQE degrading the most—down to a result quality of 0.80 for
the largest problem instance size of 21 locations.
C. Noise-aware Simulation
The noise-aware simulation is based on Qiskit’s
BackendSampler simulator using the FakeBackend for
ibmq_montreal with 27 qubits. The respective computation
times for all algorithms are provided in Fig. 6a and follow a
similar exponential trend for an increasing number of locations
with W-QAOA being the fastest algorithm for smaller problem
instances and VQE for larger ones. Compared to the noise-free
simulation, the computation times are significantly higher for
similar problem sizes. This is caused by a combination of
three factors: the classical optimizer requires more iterations
to converge at each execution, the additional compilation
time to compile the underlying quantum circuit such that
it is executable on the selected (but simulated) quantum
device, and the increased simulation time for a noise-aware
simulation. Due to this increase in computation time, the
maximal number of locations evaluated is smaller compared
to the noise-free simulation.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

4 6 8 10 12 14
Number of Locations
102
103
104
Calculation Time [s]
VQE
QAOA
W-QAOA
(a) Calculation time for SMPP instances.
4 6 8 10 12 14
Number of Locations
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00Result Quality
VQE
QAOA
W-QAOA (b) Result quality for SMPP instances.
Fig. 6: Experimental evaluation for the satellite use-case using a noise-aware simulation.
The result quality is shown in Fig. 6b with a qualitatively
similar trend of decreasing result quality for an increasing
number of locations. However, the quality drop is greater
with the lowest quality around 70%—already for a number
of locations where the result quality was close-to optimal in
the noise-free simulation.
Although the literature suggests that one uses the SPSA opti-
mizer for noise-aware simulations (e.g., in [27]), that optimizer
led to worse results while taking more computation time. The
reason could be that the loss landscapes and the respective
solutions of the considered SMPPs have been sufficiently
distinct for the faster Cobyla optimizer not to degrade too
much due to the induced noise.
Through the studies summarized above, the potential for
solving the SMPP using VQAs has been evaluated for the
first time. Based on that, the “lessons learned” are discussed
in the following.
IV. D ISCUSSION
VQAs have demonstrated promising results in solving com-
binatorial optimization problems, including those in the satel-
lite domain. However, they face several challenges that need
to be addressed. One significant limitation is the requirement
for a large number of qubits to solve larger problems (since
each to-be-captured location is encoded as one qubit)—easily
outgrowing what current simulators can reasonably simulate
and the capabilities of available quantum devices. Further-
more, VQAs are known to suffer from the issue of barren
plateaus, which can make finding the optimal solution difficult,
particularly in complex optimization problems. Determining
the optimal set of parameters for the classical optimizer is
another challenge, particularly for large problems, and can
increase the computational cost and time required for solving
optimization problems.
Although classical solvers currently outperform VQAs,
these hybrid classical quantum algorithms, in general, still
present a promising approach since the ongoing development
of quantum hardware and software is expected to improve
the performance of VQAs—making it an increasingly viable
option for solving optimization problems in the future.
V. C ONCLUSIONS
Due to the increasing number of satellites and their limited
resources, the Satellite Mission Planning Problem (SMPP)
becomes more relevant. Classical solutions have already been
proposed decades ago but have only seen evolutionary en-
hancements since then. Quantum computing, on the other
hand, has the potential for a revolutionary improvement. To
this end, a hybrid classical quantum computing approach to
the SMPP is proposed in this work using three different Vari-
ational Quantum Algorithms : VQE, QAOA, and W-QAOA.
To demonstrate their potential, SMPP instances have been
experimentally evaluated in both a noise-free with up to
21 to-be-captured locations and a noise-aware simulation
with up to 14 to-be-captured locations—often leading to
(close-to) optimal results. This proof-of-concept showcases
the general applicability of quantum computing to solve the
SMPP and is available on GitHub (https://github.com/cda-tum/
mqt-problemsolver) as part of the Munich Quantum Toolkit
(MQT). Although the proposed quantum approach cannot
compete with the classical solutions yet, promising develop-
ments in both quantum hardware and software—especially in
recent years—might change that in the future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work received funding from the European Re-
search Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation program (grant agreement No.
101001318), was part of the Munich Quantum Valley, which is
supported by the Bavarian state government with funds from
the Hightech Agenda Bayern Plus, and has been supported
by the BMWK on the basis of a decision by the German
Bundestag through project QuaST, as well as by the BMK,
BMDW, and the State of Upper Austria in the frame of the
COMET program (managed by the FFG). Finally, we thank
the organizers of the Quantum Entrepreneurship Lab which
sparked the idea for this work.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

REFERENCES
[1] E. Bensanna, G. Verfaillie, J. Agnèse, N. Bataille, and
D. Blumstein, “Exact and approximate methods for the
daily management of an earth observation satellite,”
in Int’l Symposium on Space Mission Operations and
Ground Data Systems, Munich, Germany , 1996.
[2] M. Lemaitre and G. Verfaillie, “Daily management
of an earth observation satellite: Comparison of ilog
solver with dedicated algorithms for valued constraint
satisfaction problems,” in ILOG Int’l Users Meeting ,
1997.
[3] G. Verfaillie, M. Lemaitre, and T. Schiex, “Russian doll
search for solving constraint optimization problems,” in
AAAI/IAAI, Vol. 1, Citeseer, 1996.
[4] S. Peng, H. Chen, J. Li, and N. Jing, “A heuristic
method for single satellite observation and transmission
tasks planning,” in Int’l Conference on Natural Compu-
tation, Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge Discovery (ICNC-
FSKD), IEEE, 2017.
[5] W. Chong, L. Jun, J. Ning, W. Jun, and C. Hao, “A
distributed cooperative dynamic task planning algorithm
for multiple satellites based on multi-agent hybrid learn-
ing,” Chinese Journal of Aeronautics , 2011.
[6] H. Hao, W. Jiang, and Y . Li, “Improved algorithms
to plan missions for agile earth observation satellites,”
Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics , 2014.
[7] N. Quetschlich, L. Burgholzer, and R. Wille, “Towards
an Automated Framework for Realizing Quantum Com-
puting Solutions,” in Int’l Symp. on Multi-Valued Logic,
2023.
[8] B. Poggel, N. Quetschlich, L. Burgholzer, R. Wille, and
J. M. Lorenz, “Recommending Solution Paths for Solv-
ing Optimization Problems with Quantum Computing,”
in Int’l Conf. on Quantum Software , 2023.
[9] N. Stamatopoulos et al., “Option pricing using quantum
computers,” Quantum, 2020.
[10] C. Zoufal, A. Lucchi, and S. Woerner, “Quantum Gen-
erative Adversarial Networks for learning and loading
random distributions,” npj Quantum Information , 2019.
[11] A. Kandala et al., “Hardware-efficient variational quan-
tum eigensolver for small molecules and quantum mag-
nets,” Nature, 2017.
[12] A. Roggero, A. C. Y . Li, J. Carlson, R. Gupta, and G. N.
Perdue, “Quantum computing for neutrino-nucleus scat-
tering,” Physical Review D , 2020.
[13] T. Stollenwerk, V . Michaud, E. Lobe, M. Picard, A.
Basermann, and T. Botter, “Image acquisition plan-
ning for earth observation satellites with a quantum
annealer,” 2020. arXiv: 2006.09724.
[14] A. Peruzzo et al., “A variational eigenvalue solver on a
photonic quantum processor,” Nature Communications,
2014.
[15] E. Farhi, J. Goldstone, and S. Gutmann, “A quantum ap-
proximate optimization algorithm,” 2014. arXiv: 1411.
4028.
[16] D. J. Egger, J. Mare ˇcek, and S. Woerner, “Warm-starting
quantum optimization,” Quantum, 2021.
[17] P. W. Shor, “Polynomial-time algorithms for prime
factorization and discrete logarithms on a quantum
computer,” SIAM Journal on Computing , 1997.
[18] L. K. Grover, “A fast quantum mechanical algorithm
for database search,” Proc. of the ACM , 1996.
[19] A. W. Harrow, A. Hassidim, and S. Lloyd, “Quantum
algorithm for linear systems of equations,” Physical
Review Letters, 2009.
[20] J. Preskill, “Quantum Computing in the NISQ era and
beyond,” Quantum, 2018.
[21] F. Dominguez, J. Unger, M. Traube, B. Mant, C. Ertler,
and W. Lechner, “Encoding-independent optimization
problem formulation for quantum computing,” 2023.
arXiv: 2302.03711.
[22] M. Schuld and F. Petruccione, “Machine learning with
quantum computers.” Springer, 2021.
[23] M. Weigold, J. Barzen, F. Leymann, and M. Salm, “En-
coding patterns for quantum algorithms,” IET Quantum
Communication, 2021.
[24] Qiskit contributors, “Qiskit: An open-source framework
for quantum computing,” 2023.
[25] N. Quetschlich, L. Burgholzer, and R. Wille, “Predict-
ing Good Quantum Circuit Compilation Options,” in
Int’l Conference on Quantum Software , 2023.
[26] N. Quetschlich, L. Burgholzer, and R. Wille, “Compiler
Optimization for Quantum Computing Using Reinforce-
ment Learning,” in Design Automation Conf. , 2023.
[27] R. Cumming and T. Thomas, “Using a quantum com-
puter to solve a real-world problem – what can be
achieved today?” 2022. arXiv: 2211.13080.