Variational quantum algorithms for
permutation-based combinatorial problems:
Optimal ansatz generation with applications to
quadratic assignment problems and beyond
Dylan Laplace Mermoud 1,2, Andrea Simonetto 1,2, and Sourour Elloumi 1,2,3
1UMA, ENSTA, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, 91120 Palaiseau, France
2CEDRIC, Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers, 75003 Paris, France
3ensIIE, École Nationale Supérieure d’Informatique pour l’Industrie et l’Entreprise, 91025, Évry, France
Abstract.We present a quantum variational algorithm based on a novel
circuit that generates all permutations that can be spanned by one- and two-
qubits permutation gates. The construction of the circuits follows from group-
theoretical results, most importantly the Bruhat decomposition of the group
generated by thecxgates. These circuits require a number of qubits that scale
logarithmically with the permutation dimension, and are therefore employable
in near-term applications. We further augment the circuits with ancilla qubits
to enlarge their span, and with these we build ansatze to tackle permutation-
basedoptimizationproblemssuch asquadraticassignmentproblems, and graph
isomorphisms. The resulting quantum algorithm,QuPer, is competitive with
respecttoclassicalheuristicsandwecouldsimulateitsbehavioruptoaproblem
with256variables, requiring20qubits.
DylanLaplaceMermoud: dylan.laplace@ensta.fr, ThisresearchbenefitedfromthesupportoftheFMJHProgram
PGMO, project number 2023-0009, and from the ANR project HQI-ANR-22-PNCQ-0002.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.1
arXiv:2505.05981v3  [quant-ph]  26 Jan 2026

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Contents
1 Introduction 3
1.1 Closely related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4
2 General problem formulation and main results 5
2.1 Spanning permutations via a parametric circuit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5
2.2 Solving optimization problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
2.3 Organization of the paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
3 Spanning permutations 7
3.1 Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
3.2 The group generated byxgates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8
3.3 The group generated bycxgates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
3.4 The group generated both byxandcxgates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
4 Quantum circuits 13
4.1 Circuits forX q . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13
4.2 Circuits forCX q . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13
4.3 The Borel subgroupB. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
4.4 The Weyl subgroupW. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
4.5 Exploring the whole group generated bycxgates andLX q . . . . . . . . . .18
4.6 Topology constraints on near-term devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .19
4.7 Counting the number of spanned permutations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .19
5 Ansatze for optimization problem-solving 20
5.1 Obtaining a doubly-stochastic matrix from a quantum circuit . . . . . . . .20
5.2 Increasing the number of explored permutations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .22
5.3 ConsideredU(θ)and empirical quantum boost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .23
6 Application to optimization problems 25
6.1 Quadratic assignment problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .26
6.2 Quantum QAP solver:QuPer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .26
6.2.1 Numerical results: QAPlib . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .28
6.2.2 Numerical results: Random instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .29
6.3 Graph isomorphism problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .30
6.3.1 Numerical results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .30
7 Conclusions 32
A Computation complexity considerations 37
B Construction of parametrizedcxgate 37
C Projection onto permutations 37
D Full results for QAP 38
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.2

=== PAGE BREAK ===

1 Introduction
Combinatorial optimization has been advocated as one of the key benchmarks for quantum
computing: its classically hard nature combined with its wide societal importance makes
it an attractive area of research for quantum algorithms. One of such algorithms is the
celebrated quantum approximate optimization algorithm, orQaoa, specifically designed
for noisy intermediate-scale quantum computers (or NISQ) [1, 2], which now exists in many
variants, see [3] for an account. Other algorithms have been also proposed in other noise
regimes, but they will not be our main focus in this paper.
Even thoughQaoahas been widely studied, its performance on hard combinatorial
problems is still under scrutiny. Theoretically, we know thatQaoais not classically
simulable, and it may have some, albeit limited, advantage with respect to some classical
algorithm [4, 5, 6]; however, more broadly,Qaoais not readily expected to solve relevant
combinatorial problems at scale. There are at least two main issues that would challenge
Qaoato achieve that.
First, despite their hardness, there exist methods performing well at solving combina-
torial problems classically, or at least at finding approximate solutions. As Berstimas and
Dunn describe in a recent paper,“in the last 25 years, algorithmic advances in integer op-
timization coupled with hardware improvements have resulted in an astonishing 800 billion
factor speedup in mixed-integer optimization”(a class of hard combinatorial problems) [7].
This translates, for example, into solving some sparse instances of quadratic unconstrained
binary optimization problems (QUBOs) exactly up to tens of thousands of variables [8].
Qaoawould require at least tens of thousands of logical qubits to achieve a similar feat.
Second, in general,Qaoacannot handle constraints in an hard form. We are forced to
soft-constraintheproblembyliftingtheconstrainsintothecost, therebycreatingnumerical
issues and approximations. Constraints are at the heart of optimization: we model and
then simplify optimization problems by adding constraints of all sorts.
In order to overcome the first issue, mainly due to the basis encoding of the search space
inQaoa, we have seen some interest in amplitude encodings [9, 10]. Amplitude encodings
require a number of qubits that scales logarithmically with the number of the variables
of the optimization problem, thereby being more resource-friendly. Amplitude encodings
present other issues, however. The fact that they encode directly vector components and
matrices yield typically non-diagonal observables. Furthermore, in most cases, they are
trivially classically simulable. Take for example the max-cut formulation in [11]. Ifnindi-
cates the number of decision variables of a max-cut formulation, then the approach requires
onlyO(logn)qubit to run. However, the computation of the observable, i.e., the cost, re-
quiresO(n 2)calls to the quantum circuit and a total number ofO(n3)floating operations
(cf. Appendix A). To run the same heuristic classically, without quantum computations,
we would only requireO(n2)floating point operations to evaluate the cost.
In contrast, in [12] the authors propose an amplitude encoding of the subgraph iso-
morphism problem. This is a genuine quantum algorithm, requiringO(log(n))qubits to
represent a problem innvariables, and with a circuit delivering directly the cost function
(the observable is the projector on the first basis state), so a simple average of a number
of samples is required classically to retrieve the expected value of the quantum cost. In
contrast, a solely classical approach would requireO(n2)floating point to compute the
cost. So dealing with amplitude encodings requires great care.
In order to tackle the second issue (the constraints), different variations ofQaoa
have been proposed, in which we encode in one way or another some constraints into
the variational circuit to optimize over. A popular approach is to encode the constraints
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.3

=== PAGE BREAK ===

into the mixer Hamiltonian [13, 14], which works well for some constraints but might
be hard in general [15]. Another approach is to map the feasible space and define a
continuous quantum walk that transverses this space [16]. Other approaches are presented
in [17, 18, 19]. All these approaches are constraint-dependent and either hard to generalize,
to implement, or their accuracy is limited. For example, mapping the whole feasible space
classically may even be as hard as solving the original combinatorial problem.
Withthisinmind, inthispaper, wedepartfromstandardQaoawiththeaimtodevelop
variational quantum algorithms that can tackle one typical combinatorial constraint at
scale. We focus here on permutation-based binary optimization problems [20]: problems
which are defined over permutations, which are widespread in operations research. For
example, the quadratic assignment problem, the graph isomorphism problem, and the
travel salesperson problem are permutation-based optimization problems. We argue that
these problems provide a very useful baseline to construct more complicated problems.
Besides their usefulness, we focus here on permutations, since they have quite a natural
quantum structure. Permutations are in fact unitary matrices and they can be encoded
in quantum gates natively. Furthermore, we will see that permutations have a number of
useful mathematical properties that makes them the ideal candidate for quantum circuits.
To try to overcome some of the drawbacks ofQaoa, instead of interpreting the cost as
observable or encoding it in a quantum circuit, we encode directly a permutation ansatz.
The circuit, when measured, directly delivers a doubly-stochastic matrix, i.e., a positive
superposition of permutation matrices. This has several advantages: first, the cost can be
computed classically and can be anything. This renders the approach extremely general,
which allows us to test it on various problems. Second, we can use amplitude encodings to
reduce the number of used qubits without having the problem of a non-diagonal observable.
This win-win setting is also made non classically simulable by adding additional ancilla
qubits, following the very clever circuit design of Mariella and coauthors [21].
More specifically, in this paper, we offer the following contributions.
1. We study variational quantum circuits that can span a given permutation set. In
particular, we construct a quantum circuit made of rotations and parametrizedcx
gates that can deliverallthe permutations available by using these local gates alone.
For a number of qubitsq= log2nifnis the permutation size, the circuit hasO(q 2)
classical parameters,O(q)depth, and spans2 O(q2) permutations.
2. We propose a quantum circuit that can bridge the gap between the maximum span
and the total number of permutations, i.e.,2O(q2) vs.(2 q)!, by using ancilla qubits.
We study how the ancilla qubits can deliver doubly-stochastic matrices, their maxi-
mum span, and how to construct permutations with them.
3. We test the circuit on several optimization problems of wide-reaching interest propos-
ingQuPer, a variational quantum algorithm for permutation-based optimization
problems. In particular, we tackle the quadratic assignment problem and the graph
isomorphism. We show that we are competitive with classical heuristic on small and
sometimes bigger instances withn= 256variables, and we perform better than other
variational quantum algorithms, when they exist.
1.1 Closely related work
Classically, permutation-based problems have received a lot of attention. We will report in
the sections related to each problem that we simulate an account of the literature for that
specific problem. However, we can already refer to [22] as a typical convex approach for the
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.4

=== PAGE BREAK ===

this general class of optimization problems. This approach would convexify the constraints,
by letting the permutation being a doubly-stochastic matrix, solve the problem exactly,
and then project the solution onto the permutation set. This particular approach can
offer good approximate solutions when the cost is convex in the permutation variable.
Our quantum approach is somewhat similar, since it generates doubly-stochastic matrices,
but it is a non-convex heuristic, instead of being convex, and it can be applied to a large
variety of problems. Of [22], we keep the projection-onto-permutations strategy [23], which
is standard in classical optimization and which we will describe in details.
The permutation circuit construction that we propose is largely inspired from the cir-
cuit of [21]. There, Mariella and coauthors propose a non-classically simulable circuit to
generate doubly-stochastic matrices that they then use to solve an optimal transport prob-
lem. In this paper, we study with great care which unitary to use within the circuit to
span as much as possible the permutation set, and we prove additional results on the span
of the obtained double-stochastic matrices. We see that this is not a trivial question and
different choices of the unitary lead to very different results.
In order for us to study the span of certain unitaries that we construct based on rotation
and parametrizedcxgates, we make heavy use of group theory concepts, such as semi-
direct products and the Bruhat decomposition. Here, we build on the work of [24], who
studied quantum circuits ofcxgates and their span. But then we largely generalize his
work to rotation gates, parametrizedcxs, and their combinations. We will provide specific
references as we go along. As a side note, the Bruhat decomposition has been also used in
the context of stabilizer circuits, where the decomposition of the symplectic groups allows
for designed circuits of reduced depth [25].
2 General problem formulation and main results
We are interested in solving the problem
min
P∈Πn
f(P),(1)
whereΠ n is the set of permutation matrices of dimensionn×n, andf: Π n→Ris a
cost function to minimize. We letn= 2 q for any integerq, without loss of generality.
Problem(1)is binary, combinatorial, and in generalNP-Hard. Whenfis linear inP, then
the problem reduces to the linear assignment problem, a convex optimization problem that
is easily solvable at scale, e.g., with the Auction algorithm [26]. In most of the other cases,
Problem(1)is very hard to solve classically even fornin the order of a few hundreds. In
fact, the feasible space for(1), that is the number of permutations of a given ordern, is
n!, which grows faster than an exponential.
2.1 Spanning permutations via a parametric circuit
To tackle Problem(1), we turn to variational quantum algorithms. In particular, we will
devise a parametric quantum circuitP(θ)that will be able to represent a large subset of
the whole permutation set. When measuring the circuit, we will obtain the coefficients of
a doubly-stochastic matrix ˆPθ, that can then be used classically to optimize a certain cost
f( ˆPθ). On the classical side, we will be using a classical optimizer (hereunderAdam[27])
to optimize forθ, while asking to the quantum circuit the value ofˆPθ for each givenθ.
During the run, we have the possibility to classically project the obtained doubly-stochastic
matrix ˆPθ onto the permutation set, thereby obtaining an approximate solution˜P.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.5

=== PAGE BREAK ===

The advantage of the approach proposed in this paper lies in the representation of the
quantum circuitP(θ), which allows us to span a larger set of the permutation set with
a limited number of continuous parametersθ. We will see that this circuit is, in general,
non classically simulable, thereby granting our variational quantum algorithm the label of
a genuine quantum approach.
We report in Figure 1, the aforementioned approach. We remark thatP(θ)is designed
as such that permutations are encoded in amplitudes, so that the number of required qubits
will scale only logarithmically with the permutation setn.P(θ)will be also augmented
by an arbitrary even number2mof ancilla qubits to guarantee both a larger span and a
non-trivially classically simulable circuit.
f( ˆPθ)
Computing the nextθto
try via a classical
optimizer, here ADAM,
Section 6
θ+
ˆPθ
cost
quantum
classical
Projection onto
permutations
˜P∈Π n, Section 6
Quantum variational circuit, Section 5
(various optimization
problems, Section 6)
Unitary spanning the
most permutations,
Sections 3-4
2m
2 log2 n
h
U(θ)h
h
h
P(θ)
Figure 1: Pictorial description of the proposed variational approach, labeledQuPer, with the reference
to all the sections where each element is discussed.
The first important result that we will discuss in great detail pertains how much of the
permutation set we can span with only rotation and parametrizedcxgates and how to
constructsuchacircuit. Thesegatesarethebasicgatesthatwewilluseinourconstruction,
since readily available in most quantum hardware. The result is given informally below.
Theorem 1(Informal).Consider aq-qubit circuit whose unitary is constructed to repre-
sent an-dimensional permutation.
(i) The permutations spanned only by using rotation and parametrizedcxgates can be
computed by considering the composition of two circuits: one containing rotations
only and one containing parametrizedcxgates only.
(ii) Any circuit containing parametrizedcxgates only can be decomposed into three cir-
cuits, by the Bruhat decomposition.
(iii) The circuit spanning all the permutations available by considering only rotations and
parametrizedcxhasO(q 2)parameters,O(q)depth, and spans2 O(q2) permutations.
Theorem 1 will be made formal in Sections 3 and 4, and specifically by Propositions 3
and 5 as well as Theorems 3, 4, and 6. Theorem 1 informs us that to obtain the maximum
span that local gates have to offer, we only need a number of classical parameters that
scales quadratically in the number of qubits and a linear depth. We will construct such
circuit, see for instance Figure 9.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.6

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Naturally,2 O(q2) is lower than the total number of permutations(2 q)! =n!. The
second important result is how to bridge this gap by usingmancilla qubits. We will make
use of the very clever circuit design of Mariella and coauthors [21], to generate doubly-
stochastic matrices. We will present such circuit in Figure 8 and we will study in details
the choice of ansatze to use. In addition, we will be able to show that with our ansatze for
permutations, we can span at most2O((q+m)2) permutations, and therefore we will need
at leastm≳ √nlognancilla to span the whole permutation set ofn!. We will make this
formal in Proposition 8.
2.2 Solving optimization problems
Given the circuit and the ansatze that we have designed, we will then set forth to solve
permutation-based optimization problems, such as the quadratic assignment problem and
the graph isomorphism. We will propose a novel variational algorithm, labelledQuPer,
which we will show competitive with respect to classical approaches, at least in small
instances but not only, and with which we will be able to simulate problems up ton= 256
variables in20qubits.
2.3 Organization of the paper
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Sections 3 and 4, we discuss how to
construct quantum circuits representing permutations: these are the most mathematically
heavy sections. We then propose the variational circuitP(θ)in Section 5 and analyze its
theoretical and numerical properties. In Section 6, we present numerical results for two
optimization problems of widespread interest: the quadratic assignment problem and the
graph isomorphism. We then conclude.
3 Spanning permutations
3.1 Preliminaries
The first step of our variational quantum circuit construct is a mathematical one. Given
simple local gates, hereunderxandcx, how many distinct permutation matrices can we
construct? We will see how this is important in our variational circuit in Section 5.
As such, we start by defining a quantum circuit acting onqqubits, and the the gates
xandcx, defined by
xk =|0⟩⟨1|k +|1⟩⟨0|k andcx kl =|0⟩⟨0|k⊗idl +|1⟩⟨1|k⊗xl.
The first gatexk acts on the single qubitk, while the second gatecxkl acts on two qubits,
kandl, respectively. Hence,xexchanges the two amplitudes of a one-qubit state, andcx
exchanges the amplitudes of the state of thelth qubit if the state of thekth qubit is|1⟩.
These two gates therefore act as permutation matrices on the space
(
C2)⊗q of states of
q-qubit systems.
We need now to introduce some useful group theory concepts that will help us build-
ing and counting distinct permutations. The reader is also referred to [28, 29] for good
introductions on the subject.
For any group, one can define the generators of the group, as a subset of elements of
the group that can generate the whole group. More formally, a set ofgeneratorsof a given
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.7

=== PAGE BREAK ===

groupGis a subsetS⊆Gsuch that any element of the group can be written as a word
of generators, and their inverses. Together with a set ofrelationsRthat the elements of
the group, written as words of generators, satisfy, the set of generators characterizes the
groupG. The pair⟨⟨S|R⟩⟩is called apresentation 1 of the groupG.
The group of all bijections of{1,...,n}, equipped with the law of composition, is called
thesymmetric group, here written asSn. The elements ofSn are calledpermutations. A
well-known presentation for the symmetric group is the one given byadjacent transposi-
tions: i.e., any permutation can be generated by permuting (swapping) adjacent elements.
Since we will make use of this, we describe it in details in the following example.
Example 1(Symmetric groupS n).A well-known presentation for the symmetric group
is the one given by adjacent transpositions. Indeed, any permutation can be written as a
word of adjacent transpositions. For instance, the permutation(3 2 1)2 which reverses the
order of three elements, can be written as
(3 2 1) = (2 1 3)(1 3 2)(2 1 3).
Usually, the transposition(···k+ 1k···)is denoted byσ k. The set of relations defining
the symmetric group from these generators are, for all1≤k,j≤n−1such thatj̸=k±1,
σ2
k = id, σ kσj =σ jσk,andσ kσk+1σk =σ k+1σkσk+1.
The last set of relations can be transformed into(σkσk+1)3 = idusingσ 2
k = id, whereid
represents the identity.♢
The language of group theory using presentations can be directly transposed in the
language of quantum circuits, at the very least for three reasons. First, a quantum circuit
can be interpreted as a word of tensor products of basic gates. Secondly, the concept of
generators is tightly connected to the one of basic gates: in order to write efficient circuits
for the group under consideration, the generators must be written efficiently, as short words
of basic gates. Finally, the relations give rewriting rules to design shorter circuits.
We consider now the group generated byxgates alone.
3.2 The group generated byxgates
LetX q denote the group generated by{xk|0≤k≤q−1}. The group is abelian (i.e.,
any pair of elements commutes), and contains2q elements. Because each generator only
applies to one qubit and is an involution, any element of the group can be seen as a tuple
of generators, exhibiting the direct sum structure of the group:
Xq≃
q−1⨁
k=0
Z2 =:Z q
2.
Here,Z 2 denotes the group defined on the set{0,1}equipped with the bitwise ‘exclusive-or’
additive law⊕defined by
1⊕1 = 0⊕0 = 0,and1⊕0 = 0⊕1 = 1.
1We use here the notation⟨⟨·|·⟩⟩instead of the more common⟨·|·⟩to avoid confusion with the inner
product of two quantum states.
2We used here theone-linenotation for permutations. The permutation(σ 1···σ i···σ n)sendsitoσ i.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.8

=== PAGE BREAK ===

A presentation forXq is therefore given by
⟨⟨x0,...,x q−1|x 2
k =idand(x kxl)2 =id,for all0≤k,l≤q−1⟩⟩.
It is customary in group theory to write the relators as words of generators that correspond
to the identity. However, this expression can be rewritten as follows. We can apply
the exponentiation to getx kxlxkxl =id. By multiplying on both sides byx lxk, and
remembering that eachxis an involution, i.e., its own inverse, we obtainxkxl =x lxk, so
xk andx l commute.
3.3 The group generated bycxgates
LetCX q denote the group generated by{cxkl|k̸=l,0≤k,l≤q−1}. This group is no
longer abelian, because we have
cxklcxlm̸=cx lmcxkl,fork,l,mall distinct.
A presentation ofCXq was identified by Bataille [24].
Proposition 1([24]).A presentation for the groupCXq is given by the set of generators
{cxkl|k̸=l,0≤k,l≤q−1}and the relations
•involution:cx 2
kl =idwherek̸=l,
•commutation:(cx klcxmp)2 =idwherek̸=pandl̸=m,
•non-commutation:(cx klcxlm)2 =cx km wherek,l,mare distinct.
LetGL n(F2)be the group of invertible(n×n)-matrices over the fieldF2. Steinberg [30]
gave a presentation of it that perfectly coincides with the one ofCXgiven by Bataille [24].
Proposition 2([30, 24]).The groupCX q is isomorphic toGLq(F2).
This result will allow us to leverage the properties ofGLq(F2), to implement the full
CXq in quantum circuits. In particular, Bruhat and Tits [31] demonstrated that any
element ofGLq(F2)can be written as the product of three elements, belonging to specific
subgroups ofGLq(F2). Let us see how.
LetBdenote the subgroup ofGL q(F2)only composed of upper-triangular matrices,
and letWdenote the subgroup only composed of permutation matrices.
Theorem 2(The Bruhat decomposition [31, 32]).GLq(F2)is isomorphic toBWB.
The Bruhat decomposition will be the cornerstone of our construction. It allows us to
decomposethecircuitsynthesisproblemintotwo, muchsimpler, circuitsynthesisproblems.
3.4 The group generated both byxandcxgates
In this subsection, we presentnew resultsabout the structure of the whole group generated
byxandcxgates, and explain how it relates to the two groups described earlier. This
group includes all the circuits onqqubits composed solely ofxandcxgates, up to rewriting
rules, i.e., relations, that we present in the following.
LetLX q denote the group generated by
{xk|0≤k≤q−1}∪{cx kl|k̸=l,0≤k,l≤q−1},
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.9

=== PAGE BREAK ===

the set of all local permutation gates. Necessarily, it contains bothX q andCX q as a
subgroup, and therefore is subject to the same relations as they do. However, new elements
generated both byxandcxare generated, which are subject to new relations. For instance,
we know that anycxgate commutes with axgate that acts on different qubits. The
behavior of these gates is however different when they act on the same qubits.
Consider the following. Letx 1 andcx 12 act on each of the state|00⟩,|01⟩,|10⟩and
|11⟩in both orders. Then, simple computations lead to
cx12x1|00⟩=cx 12|10⟩=|11⟩,x 1cx12|00⟩=x 1|00⟩=|10⟩,
cx12x1|01⟩=cx 12|11⟩=|10⟩,x 1cx12|01⟩=x 1|01⟩=|11⟩,
cx12x1|10⟩=cx 12|00⟩=|00⟩,x 1cx12|10⟩=x 1|11⟩=|01⟩,
cx12x1|11⟩=cx 12|01⟩=|01⟩,x 1cx12|11⟩=x 1|10⟩=|00⟩.
As anticipated, we have thatx1 andcx 12 do not commute. However, we can see that the
results obtained differ exactly by a bitflip on the rightmost bit. Therefore, we can write
cx12x1x2 =x 1cx12.
We obtain similar result when applyingx2 orx 1x2 after thecx 12:
x2cx12 =cx 12x2,x 1x2cx12 =cx 12x1.
The circuit diagrams corresponding to these relations are given in Figure 2.
x
=
x
x
=
x x
x
=
x
x
Figure 2: Relations betweencxandxintroduced in the new group.
Interpreting these relations as rewriting rules, it is possible to move as far as one wishes
thexgates throughcxgates, with possibly a different number ofxgates at the end of the
process. This eventually leads to the statement of Theorem 3.
A usual way for a groupHto act on another groupGis byconjugation, i.e., via a
group homomorphismφh, defined for all elementh∈Hbyφ h(g) =hgh−1, for allg∈G.
Expressing the relations expressed above and in Figure 2 as conjugations yields
φjk(xj) =x jxk, φ jk(xk) =x k, φ jk(xjxk) =x j,
withφ jk =φ cxjk, remembering thatcx−1
jk =cx jk. Notice thatφ jk is a group morphism,
illustrated for instance byφjk(xjxk) =φ jk(xj)φjk(xk) =x 1x2x2 =x 1. To be complete, we
can add thatφkl acts like the identity onxgates acting on different qubits thankandl.
We now can give a presentation of the groupLXq generated by local permutation gates.
Proposition 3.A presentation of the groupLXq is given by the generators
{xj|0≤j≤q−1}∪{cx kl|k̸=l,0≤k,l≤q−1}
and the relations given by the groupXq, the groupCXq and the relations in Figure 2:
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.10

=== PAGE BREAK ===

•commutation:(x jcxkl)2 =Iwherek /∈{j,l}, and
•non-commutation:(x jcxjk)2 =x k wherej̸=k.
Proof.We summarize the computation derived above. First, becauseLX q is generated
both byxandcxgates, then it satisfies the relations ofX q andCX q. For the additional
ones expressed in Figure 2, commutation relations arise whenever two gates are applied
on different qubits, as expected. The last relations are derived exhaustively by trying all
possible products of an individualcxgate and an individualxgate. There are four cases:
xjcxjk,x kcxjk,cx jk xj,andcx jk xk.
Studying the transformation induced by each of these circuits yields the identities:
xjcxjk =cx jk xjxk,x kcxjk =cx jk xk,andx jxkcxjk =cx jk xj.
The expression in the middle gives another commutation relation, which completes their
enumeration. On the other ones, we multiply bycxjk on the right on all these expressions:
xj =cx jk xjxkcxjk =φ jk(xjxk),andx jxk =cx jk xjcxjk =φ jk(xj).
Becauseφ jk(xk) =x k andφ jk is a group morphism, we can deriveφjk(xjxk)fromφ jk(xj):
φjk(xjxk) =φ jk(xj)φjk(xk) =x jxkxk =x j,
therefore onlyφjk(xj) =cx jk xjcxjk =x jxk is necessary to complete the presentation. To
put it under the standard form of a presentation, we rewrite it by multiplying on the left
byx j on both sides, giving the non-commutation relations.
We now have a presentation of the groupLXq, which is the group of all circuits onq
qubits only composed ofxandcxgates. Each element ofLX q represents such a circuit,
up to the rewriting rules expressed as the relations of the presentation.
For the time being, we still do not know how to efficiently expressed elements ofLXq as
quantum circuits. So, to complete the study of the structure of the groupLXq, we present
a decomposition result for its elementsUinto two elementsU=U 1U2, withU 1 written
only usingxgates, andU 2 only bycxgates. This decomposition result follows from the
semi-direct productstructure ofLXq.
Definition 1(Semi-direct product [28, p. 177]).LetNandHbe groups and letφbe a
group morphism fromHintoAut(N) 3. Then the (outer)semi-direct productN⋊ φHof
NandHwith respect toφis defined as follows:
•The underlying set is the Cartesian productN×H,
•The group operation is determined, for alln1,n 2 inNandh 1,h 2 inH, by
(N⋊ φH)×(N⋊ φH)→N⋊ φH
(
(n1,h 1),(n 2,h 2)
)
↦→
(
n1φh1(n2), h1h2
)
.
Whenφis clear from the context, we simply writeN⋊H.
The semi-direct product of two groups can also be computed using the presentations
of the two factor groupsNandHand a choice of group morphismφ:H→Aut(N).
3As usualAut(N)denotes the group of all possible automorphisms of a given groupN.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.11

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Proposition 4([29, Corollary 1, p.140]).LetH=⟨⟨X|R⟩⟩andN=⟨⟨Y|S⟩⟩be groups,
andφ:H→Aut(N)a group homomorphism. Then the semidirect productN⋊ φHhas
the following presentation:
N⋊H=⟨⟨X∪Y|R,S,xyx −1 =φ(x)(y),∀x∈X,y∈Y⟩⟩.
We can now derive the relationship among the three groupsXq,CX q andLX q.
Proposition 5.The group ofxandcxgates is isomorphic to the semi-direct product of
the groups ofxandcxgates taken alone, that is:LX q≃X q ⋊CX q.
Proof.We use the same notation as before. We indeed have thatLXq is generated by the
union of the generators ofXq andCX q. Moreover, the elements ofLXq satisfy both the
relations ofXq andCX q. Now, we set
φ:CX q →Aut(X q)
cxkl ↦→φkl :X q →X q
w↦→φkl(w) =cx klwcxkl .
The automorphismsφ kl already act by conjugacy, and the relations ofLXq contains all
the relations that can be generated from it, which are the ones described in Proposi-
tion 3. Then, the presentation ofXq ⋊CX q coincides with the one ofLXq, and because
presentations characterize groups up to isomorphism, we have thatLXq≃X q ⋊CXq.
It turns out that the groupLXq is isomorphic to a well-known group. LetVbe a
vector space. We call the groupAGLn(V)defined byAGL n(V) =V⋊GL n(V)theaffine
groupofV.
Corollary 1.The group of permutations generated byxandcxgates is isomorphic to the
affine group ofFq
2, i.e.,LXq≃AGLq(F2).
Proof.This follows from Proposition 2 and the definition of the affine group.
Remark3.1.Notice that the roles ofX q andCX q here areasymmetric. Indeed, elements
ofCX q are mapped to automorphisms ofXq in a natural way, and this is possible because,
for allcxkl∈CX q, we have thatφkl(w)∈X q for allw∈X q. We can extend this to the
whole group, by noticing thatw1w2w−1
1 ∈X q for allw 1,w 2∈X q. Groups satisfying this
properties are said to benormalin their ambient group, and we writeXq⊴LX q.
The next result provides the last tool necessary for the derivation of the decomposition.
Proposition 6([28, Theorem 12 and Proposition 8]).SupposeGis a group with subgroups
NandHsuch thatN⊴G, andN∩H= id. Letφ:H→Aut(N)be the automorphism
defined by mappingh∈Hto the automorphismφ h :n∈N↦→hnh −1 ∈N. Then
NH≃N⋊H. Moreover, each element ofNHcan be written uniquely as a productnh,
for somen∈Nandh∈H.
The result above summarizes what it means to be a semi-direct product for two groups.
Simply, we can take products of elements of each groups, and form an element of a larger
group. However, characterizing the group by identifying all the relations satisfied by the
elements is not trivial whenever some of the elements do not commute. We are now able
to state our decomposition result.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.12

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theorem 3.Every elementU∈LX q can be uniquely written as a productU1U2, with
U1∈X q andU 2∈CX q.
Proof.ByProposition5, weknowthatLX q≃X q⋊CXq, soweaimtoapplyProposition6.
ByRemark3.1, wehavethatX q isanormalsubgroupofLX q. Thelasthypothesistocheck
is that the intersection ofXq andCX q is the identity. Consider any elementwX∈X q
which is not the identity, and apply it to the ground state of aq-qubit register,|0⟩ q.
Necessarily, we have thatwX|0⟩q̸=|0⟩ q. Now, letwCX be an element ofCXq not being
the identity. Necessarily, we have thatwCX|0⟩q =|0⟩ q. Then,w X̸=w CX, and the only
common element betweenXq andCX q is the identity. We can now apply Proposition 6,
which concludes the proof.
Thanks to Theorem 3, it suffices to know how to design a circuitCX that spans the
entirety ofX q and another circuitC CX that spans the entirety ofCX q to be able to
construct a quantum algorithm spanning every possible circuit formed byxandcxgates,
up to the rewriting rules. The design of these circuits is the topic of the next section.
4 Quantum circuits
4.1 Circuits forX q
In this section, we translate the group-theoretic results from the previous session into
concrete tools to build circuits exploring groups. A straightforward example is the circuit
CX(θ)exploring the groupX q≃F q
2. It simply amounts to a layer ofrx(θj)gates, with
the parameterθ j playing the role of a switch: when it is evaluated at0, the gate is the
identity, and when it is evaluated atπ, then the acts likex, up to an unimportant global
phase factor. The strength of the variational quantum circuitCX(θ)is that it allows for
more value ofθj than just0andπ. Actually, any real number is a valid parameter. Hence,
the circuit explores the groupXq while travelling through some extra space giving by this
relaxation, therefore being in a superposition of permutations.
4.2 Circuits forCX q
The picture gets blurrier when we want to explore the groupCXq. We need to leverage the
results of the previous section to divide this problem into easier subproblems, i.e., smaller
groups for which we know how to design variational quantum circuits exploring them.
We recall that it has been shown by Bataille [24] thatCXq is isomorphic toGLq(F2).
In order to span the latter group in a compact way with a parameterized circuit, we use
the Bruhat decomposition ofGLq(F2)(see Theorem 2). Consider the following.
Given a groupGwith subgroupsBandN, the data defining aBN-pair [33] consists
formally of a quadruple(G,B,N,S)subject to the following requirements. First,Gis
generated by its subgroupsBandN. Second,B∩Nis a normal subgroup ofN. Third,
the groupW :=N/(B∩N)is generated by a setSof involutions and, finally, for alls∈S
andw∈W, we havesBw⊆BwB∪BswB, as well assBs̸=B.
In the caseG= GL q(F2), the subgroupBis theBorel subgroupformed by the upper
triangular matrices, andNis the subgroup having a unique non-zero element per row
and per column [32]. OverF 2,Nis only composed of permutation matrices. Then,
the subgroupB∩N={I}is trivial, because the only permutation matrix being upper
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.13

=== PAGE BREAK ===

triangular is the identity. Therefore, theWeyl groupW=N/(B∩N)of theBN-pair is
simply the symmetric groupSq.
Recall now that the Bruhat decomposition theorem states that any groupGsatisfying
the conditions described above can be written asG=BWB. More specifically, each
element ofGL q(F2), and therefore ofCXq, can be uniquely written as the product of a
permutation matrix, multiplied on the left and the right by upper triangular matrices.
Fortunately, bothWandBcan be easily embedded into quantum circuits.
4.3 The Borel subgroupB
The Borel subgroupBis the subgroup ofGLq(F2)composed of upper triangular matrices.
Because they are invertible, and defined overF2, their diagonal only contains the entry1.
Hence, their coefficients can only differ strictly above the diagonal. The matrices are of
sizeq×q, so there are(q−1) + (q−2) +...+ 1 =
(q
2
)
entries that vary. Because each of
them can only take two values, there are2(q
2) elements in the Borel subgroupB. Hence,
the minimal number of gates we need to spanBis
(q
2
)
.
Because we are on the fieldF2, the groupGLq(F2)is isomorphic toSLq(F2), the group
of invertible matrices with determinant1. Therefore, we can use the result presented in [34,
Theorem 4.6] to say that a set of generators is given by the transvections
{T(jk)|1≤j,k≤q},withT (jk) =I+E (jk),
whereE (jk) is the matrix with a1at entry(j,k)and0everywhere else. Bataille [24]
has shown that the transvections are in bijection with thecxgates. More precisely, the
transvectionT (jk) corresponds to thecxgate controlled by qubitkacting on qubitj. This
construction is used to build the isomorphism betweenGLq(F2)andCX q.
As we will demonstrate shortly, the Borel subgroupBconsisting of upper-triangular
invertible matrices is generated by upper-triangular transvections, i.e., by the set
{
T(jk)|1≤j <k≤q
}
.
Then, the groupBis generated by thecxgates where the index of the control qubit is
smaller than the one of the target qubit. However, to build a circuit able to span all
elements ofB, we need to find auniversal elementof the group, an elementg ⋆ ∈B
which can be written as a wordw⋆ of transvections with the following property: for any
elementg∈Bwritten as a wordwof transvections,wis a subword ofw ⋆. This is a direct
generalization of the concept of longest element of the Bruhat order in Coxeter groups.
Definition 2.We say that a wordw=s j1...s jp is a subword of another wordv=
sk1...s km if there exists an order-preserving injection from the sequence(j1,...,j p)into
the sequence(k 1,...,k m). In other words,wcan be written by taking arbitrary letters
fromvas long as the order between them does not change. For example,adeis a subword
ofabcde, whileacborabfare not.
Let(Q,≺)be the ordered set withQ={(j,k)|1≤j <k≤q}being composed of all
the ordered pairs of increasing indices equipped with the lexicographic order≺given by
(j1,k 1)≺(j 2,k 2)if and only if[j 1<j 2]or[j 1 =j 2 andk 1<k 2].
The order≺is a total order onQ. We denote byw⋆ the word of transvections defined as
the product of all transvections multiplied on the left in the order of≺, i.e.,
w⋆ :=T (q−1q)T(q−2q−1)T(q−2q) ...T (jq)...T (jj−1)T(j−1q) ...T (23)T(1q)...T (13)T(12).
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.14

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Theorem 4.Any element ofBcan be written as a subword ofw⋆.
Proof.LetAbe an upper triangular matrix ofB. We show that we can obtainAfrom
the identity matrix by multiplying it on the left by a subword ofw⋆. We construct it
entry by entry, in the order given by≺. Let(QA,≺)be the ordered set of indices defined
byQ A ={(j,k)∈Q|A jk = 1}. We denote bywA the subword ofw⋆ obtained by only
keeping the symbols{T(jk)|(j,k)∈Q A}. LetM∈Bbe a matrix and(p,r)be a pair of
indices such that, for all(p,r)≺(j,k)∈Qwe haveM jk = 0, as well asMpr = 0. We have
T(pr)M=
(
I+E (pr)
)
M=M+E (pr)M.
BecauseE (pr) has a unique nonzero coefficient at entry(p,r), the productE (pr)Monly
consists of therth row ofMsitting on thepth row. But becauseM jk = 0for all(j,k)≻
(p,r), therth row ofMis simplye ⊤
r , the transpose of therth element of the canonical
basis ofFq
2. Then,T (pr)Mis equal toMto which we add1at the entry(p,r). Because we
only apply transvections following the lexicographic order≺, the productwA adds entries
1one by one to the identity when the corresponding entry inAis itself1, so it indeed
corresponds to the matrixA.
Example 2.We illustrate this result with a specific example. LetAbe an upper-
triangular matrix defined by
A=
(1 0 1 0
0 1 1 1
0 0 1 0
0 0 0 1
)
.
Then,Acan be written asA=T 24T23T13. Indeed, we have
T24
(1 0 0 0
0 1 1 0
0 0 1 0
0 0 0 1
)(1 0 1 0
0 1 0 0
0 0 1 0
0 0 0 1
)
=
(1 0 0 0
0 1 0 1
0 0 1 0
0 0 0 1
)(1 0 1 0
0 1 1 0
0 0 1 0
0 0 0 1
)
=
(1 0 1 0
0 1 1 1
0 0 1 0
0 0 0 1
)
=A.
♢
The next step is to apply Theorem 4 to actually build a quantum circuitB(θ). Using
the correspondence betweencxgates and transvections, we are able to design a variational
circuit exploring the Borel subgroupBofCX q. In these circuits, we use a custom gate,
displayed as a parameterized box with a control wire. This gate acts as the identity
whenever the parameter evaluates to0, and as acxgate when the parameter isπ, although
it is defined for all real-valued parameters. The construction is discussed in Appendix B.
Example 3.Let us illustrate this first construction on6qubits. In this case, the Borel
groupB 6 is the set of upper-triangular matrices of size6×6equipped with the usual
matrix product. Applying Theorem 4, we have that any upper-triangular matrix can be
written as a subword of
w(6)
⋆ =T (56) T(46)T(45) T(36)T(35)T(34) T(26)T(25)T(24)T(23) T(16)T(15)T(14)T(13)T(12).
Consider now the implementation of an upper-triangular matrixM∈B 6 as a quantum
circuit. We first look at the entries of our matrix from the bottom left to the bottom
right, line per line. We see that we have a transvection matrix for each of the entries. If
the entryMjk is0, we remove the corresponding transvectionTjk fromw (6)
⋆ , but if it is1,
we keep it. The word that we then obtain is equal to the matrixM. To translate it into a
quantum circuit, we use the isomorphism of Bataille [24]. We read the word representing
Mfrom right to left, and for each transvectionT(jk), we add acxkj gate to our circuit.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.15

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Hence, any upper-triangular matrix is implement as a subcircuit of the circuit spanning
the Borel subgroupB6 depicted in Figure 3.
θ1 θ2 θ3 θ4 θ5
θ6 θ7 θ8 θ9
θ10 θ11 θ12
θ13 θ14
θ15
Figure 3: Variational circuitB(θ)spanning the Borel subgroupB 6.
The parametersθin the circuits control the application of the corresponding gate in
the circuit: puttingθ= 0acts as if we remove the gate, whileθ=πimplements it fully.
The cases whenθis neither0norπis treated in the next section. Notice how the order
is flipped: this is due to the fact that functions from formulas are applied from the right
to the left, but the opposite in circuit diagrams.♢
The number of parameters and gates required in this circuit is inO(q2). However, some
of these gates can be applied in parallel. For instance, the gate depending onθ6 can be
applied as early as the one depending onθ3, and the one depending onθ10 as early as the
one depending onθ8, which is itself applied with the gate depending onθ5.
We can see the circuit as composed of several blocks, the first one being composed of
all thecxgates controlled by the first qubit, the second block being composed of thecx
gates controlled by the second qubit, and so on. We therefore haveq−1blocks. The gates
from the second block can all be executed in parallel of the one of the first block, except for
the last one, the one depending onθ9. The same phenomenon happens with each block,
where all but the last gate can be applied with the ones of the previous blocks.
Hence, even if the size of the circuit is quadratic in the number of qubits, its depth is
simply linear, as it is given by(q−1) + (q−2)∼2q∈O(q). Indeed, the first block is of
depthq−1, and each following bloc,q−2of them, only adds a depth of1.
4.4 The Weyl subgroupW
As we saw earlier, the Weyl subgroupWof theBN-pair is isomorphic to the symmet-
ric groupS q, which can be seen as the group of permutations of theqqubits (see also
Example 1). A presentation of the groupWis therefore given by
Sq =⟨⟨σ1,...,σ q−1|σ 2
k = 1,(σ kσk+1)3 = 1,(σ kσj)2 = 1if|k−j|>1⟩⟩,
with theσ 1,...,σ q−1 being the adjacent transpositions defined byσk = (k k+ 1), written
using the cycle notation. Like the upper triangular matrices being written as words of
transvections, permutations can be written as words of adjacent transpositions.
To implement these adjacent transpositions of qubits, we use the well-known decom-
position of theswapgates using threecx, the first and the third one pointing in a different
direction than the second one (see Figure 4). The first and third gates are not parameter-
ized, but the second one is. By doing so, the wholeswapgate collapses if the middlecx
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.16

=== PAGE BREAK ===

gate is set to be the identity, withϕ= 0. However, whenψ=π, the parameterizedcx
gate becomes a standardcxgate, and the three gates together are indeed aswapgate.
ϕ = ϕ
Figure 4: Construction of a parameterizedswapgate.
We now gather all these adjacent transpositions in a harmonious way in order to gen-
erate any required permutation of qubits, which compose the Weyl subgroupW.
The partial order on word representations of permutations obtained by subword rela-
tions corresponds to the Bruhat order on Coxeter groups, also known as the weak order of
permutations in the case of the symmetric group. Each Bruhat order has a unique maximal
element. Then, to span the whole groupSq, we implement a word representation of this
longest element of the Bruhat order as a quantum circuit.
Inparticular, thefollowingcharacterizationoftheBruhatorderonthesymmetricgroup
allows us to identify this longest element. For eachη∈Sq and eachj,k∈[q], define
η[j,k] :=|{l∈[j]|η(l)≥k}|.
This function counts, for each indexj∈[q], the number of smaller indices sent after index
kthrough the permutationη. We then use the following result.
Theorem 5(Björner and Brenti [35]).Letη,ρ∈S q be two permutations. Then,ηis
smaller thanρin the Bruhat order if and only ifη[j,k]≤ρ[j,k]for allj,k∈[q].
Naturally, the permutationη◦∈S q reversing the order of the elements of its input is
the unique permutation reaching the maximal valueη◦[j,k]on each pairj,k∈[q]. Then,
by Theorem 5, it is the maximal element of the Bruhat order. A maximal element for the
Bruhat order is necessarily unique, and in the case ofSq, its length, as a word of adjacent
transpositions, is
(q
2
)
[35]. A well-known word representation for the permutationη◦ is
w◦ :=σ 1 σ2σ1 σ3σ2σ1 ... σ q−1σq−2...σ 2σ1.
It is obtain by first multiplying all the adjacent transpositions in the order of the indices,
then multiplying on the left the product of all the adjacent transpositions in the order
of the indices except the last oneσq−1, and we repeat this recursively, dropping the last
transposition at each step. Theq−1first transpositions applied, i.e., the ones on the right
ofw◦, serve to put the first element of the input at the last spot. Then, theq−2next
ones are used to put the second element of the input at the second-to-last spot, and so on.
Then,w◦ is a word representing the reversing permutationη◦. Moreover, the length ofw◦
is given by
(q
2
)
, and is indeed one of the reduced word representation ofη◦.
Example 4.Let us continue Example 3, with6qubits. In this case, the elements of the
Weyl groupW6 are the permutations of6symbols, here the6qubits. Then, the maximal
element of the Bruhat order ofW6 is given by
w(6)
◦ =σ 1 σ2σ1 σ3σ2σ1 σ4σ3σ2σ1 σ5σ4σ3σ2σ1.
The quantum circuit to span the Weyl subgroupW6 is depicted in Figure 5.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.17

=== PAGE BREAK ===

ϕ1 ϕ6 ϕ10 ϕ13 ϕ15
ϕ2 ϕ7 ϕ11 ϕ14
ϕ3 ϕ8 ϕ12
ϕ4 ϕ9
ϕ5
Figure 5: Variational circuitW(ϕ)spanning the Weyl subgroupW.
Again, the parametersϕenable the user to control if the gate is active or not, allowing
the access to any subword.♢
The number of parameters of this circuit is
(q
2
)
∈O(q 2), and the number of controlled
gates is3
(q
2
)
∈O(q 2). However, as before, the depth is significantly shorter. Indeed, a lot
of gates can be applied in parallel, in the same way than for the previous circuit. As before,
there areq−1blocks, the first one increases the depth of the circuit by3(q−1), and the
following ones increase the depth by3. Hence, the depth is3(q−1) + 3(q−2)∈O(q).
4.5 Exploring the whole group generated bycxgates andLX q
To span the whole groupCXq, thanks to the Bruhat decomposition, we simply need to
concatenate the different circuits spanningBandW. Therefore, the total number of
controlled gates used to spanCXq is
(q
2
)
+ 3
(q
2
)
+
(q
2
)
= 5
(q
2
)
∈O(q 2), while the number
of parameters used is3
(q
2
)
∈O(q 2). The total depth is less than the sum of the depths,
because part of the gates of the circuit exploringWcan be applied at the same time as
some of the first occurrence of the circuit spanningB.
Example 5.Let us consider4qubits. According to Theorem 2, the Bruhat decomposition
ofCX 4 is given byB4W4B4. The circuit spanningCX4 is depicted in Figure 6.
θ1 θ2 θ3 θ7 θ8 θ9
θ4 θ5 θ10 θ11
θ6 θ12
Circuit spanningB 4
ϕ1
Circuit spanningW 4
ϕ4 ϕ6
Circuit spanningB 4
ϕ2 ϕ5
ϕ3
Figure 6: Variational circuit spanningCX4.
Notice here that the parametrization of the two Borel blocks are not parameterized by
the same values: the two blocks can encode different upper-triangular matrices.♢
The final depth of the circuit is given by
q+ 3(q−1) + 3(q−2) + (q−1) + (q−2) = 9q−12∈O(q),
hence is linear in the number of qubits.
Finally, to explore the whole groupLXq, it suffices to add a layer ofrxgate upstream
of the circuit, which increases the size of the circuit byq, and its depth by1.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.18

=== PAGE BREAK ===

4.6 Topology constraints on near-term devices
In the circuits presented above, we assume an all-to-all qubit connectivity. However, on
some hardware, and especially for near-term processors, this assumption can be too de-
manding. For the circuit spanning the Weyl groupWq, there should be no issue during the
physical implementation in terms of connectivity: we are only using2-qubits gates acting
on neighboring qubits. For the circuit spanning the Borel groupBq, this is no longer true,
because the (q-1)-th gate has the longest possible range. To solve this issue, we use the
method developed by Bäumer and Wörner [36] to implement long-rangecxgates. If we
have access to ancilla qubits, we can direct use their implementation, which works in con-
stant depth, hence it does not change the overall scaling of the depth of our circuits. For
an ancilla-free implementation, we resort to the rewriting rules in Figure 2 and Figure 3
of [36], as follows.
A long-rangecxgate can be decomposed as two multi-targetcxgates, which can
themselves be decomposed as manycxacting on neighboring qubits as follows:
= =
First multi-targetcx Second one
Figure 7: Decomposition of a long-rangecxgate usingcxacting on neighboring qubits.
Observe that, if we remove the two topmostcxgates, all the remaining ones cancel,
and we get the identity. So, we apply the parametrization on thesecxgates. It might not
be exactly the same unitary gate as the long-rangecxfor arbitrary angles, but it is not
important, as long as the evaluation atθ= 0orθ=πare the same, meaning that we span
the same permutations.
In terms of complexity, we get the following. When the index of target qubit ispless
than the index of the control qubit, we need2(1 + 2(p−1))−2 = 4(p−1)neighboring
cxgates ifp >1, and1ifp= 1. So, in a circuit spanning the Borel groupB q onq >3
qubits, the number of long-rangecxgates targeting qubitj <q−2is
1 +
q−j∑
p=2
4(p−1) = 1 + 4
q−j−1∑
p′=1
p′ = 1 + 4
(
q−j
2
)
∈O(q 2).
There are a linear number of these long-rangecx, so the size and the depth of the circuit
spanning the Borel group scale inO(q3), giving an overall circuit of cubic size and depth.
4.7 Counting the number of spanned permutations
In this section, we have translated the group-theoretical results about the structures of
the groupLXq of permutations generated by local permutations onqinto tools for circuit
synthesis. The meta-circuit exploringLXq is of the formXBWB, whereXis the group
ofxgates,Bis the Borel subgroup of upper-triangular invertible matrices ofGLq(F2), and
Wis the Weyl subgroup ofGLq(F2), isomorphic to the group of permutations ofqqubits.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.19

=== PAGE BREAK ===

These circuits, using a quadratic number of parameters, are of linear depth with respect
to the number of qubits. Thanks to the extensive characterization of the structure ofLXq,
we are able to compute the number of permutations spanned by the circuit.
Theorem 6.The maximum number of unique permutationspobtainable by circuits con-
tainingxandcxgates is
p= 2
q(q+1)
2
q∏
k=1
(
2k−1
)
∈O
(
2O(q2)
)
.
Proof.Given Theorem 3, we can count permutations by multiplying the ones coming from
Xq and the ones fromCXq. For the latter, we use the result [24, Corollary 7] about the
number of elements ofCXq≃GL q(F2), which we then need to multiply by the number of
elements ofXq (2q) to compute the number of elements ofLXq.
Evaluations of this formula for small numbers of qubits are given in Table 1, along with
the number of classical parametersℓ=q+ 3
(q
2
)
, and the depthd= 1 + 9q−12.
Table 1: Numberpof spanned permutations withqqubits, usingℓclassical parameters, inddepth. In
comparison the size of the permutation set ofΠn withn= 2 q, which we encode, isn!.
q2 3 4 5 6 7
ℓ5 12 22 35 51 70
d7 16 25 34 43 52
p24 1,344 322,560∼3.2×10 8 ∼1.3×10 12 ∼2.1×10 16
|Πn|24 40,320∼2.1×10 13 ∼2.6×10 35 ∼1.2×10 89 ∼3.8×10 215
The number of spanned permutations, i.e., all permutations obtained from one- and
two-qubit gates, is rather small compared to the total number of permutations (with the
exception ofq= 2for which the two numbers match). We see in the next section how
to make use of ancilla qubits to both increase the span and to avoid classical simulabil-
ity. Furthermore, we will see in the numerical simulation section, how, despite the small
span, we obtain reasonably good approximate solutions for permutation-based optimiza-
tion problems.
5 Ansatze for optimization problem-solving
5.1 Obtaining a doubly-stochastic matrix from a quantum circuit
As mentioned in the introduction, some challenges ofQaoaare related to the fact that
constraints are not easily implementable and that it is complicated to embed any cost
function as observable, especially in an amplitude encoding setting. We usually either
have to prepare a specific state, or to derive a cost Hamiltonian and synthesize a circuit
representing it. In this paper, we choose to do none of the technics mentioned above.
Instead, we leverage a clever quantum circuit exploited recently by Mariella et al. [21].
Consider the variational circuit presented in Figure 8, whereU(θ)∈C 2m+n is any
arbitrary unitary matrix. The circuit is initialized in the|0⟩state. We have a total of
2 log2(n) + 2mqubits. The first represents then 2 entries of a square matrix, while the
additional2mqubits are ancilla. We measure only the last2 log2(n)qubits.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.20

=== PAGE BREAK ===

m
log2 n
h
U(θ)h
h
h
m
log2 n
ˆPθ ∈DSM(R n×n)
|0⟩
|0⟩
|0⟩
|0⟩
|0⟩
|0⟩
|0⟩
|0⟩
Figure 8: Depiction of the variational circuit of Mariella et al. [21] to obtain a doubly-stochastic matrix
(DSM) starting from any unitary. For us this circuit will be denote byP(θ).
Mariella and coauthors show in their Lemma 3.1 that,for anyU(θ), measuring the
last2 log 2(n)qubits one obtains the corresponding entries of an×ndoubly-stochastic
matrix. We recall that a doubly-stochastic matrix is a convex combination of permutation
matrices. Furthermore, they also show that, ifm= 0, then the measurements deliver the
entries of the matrixU(θ)⊙ U(θ), where⊙is the Hadamard entry-wise product and (·)
is the complex conjugate operator. In particular, ifm= 0andU(θ)is a permutation
matrix, then the output of the circuit is the same permutation matrix. We summarize the
results obtained in [21] in the following proposition, for later use.
Proposition 7.[21] Let|i⟩refer to thei-th basis vector in the computational basis and
let|ij⟩=|i⟩⊗|j⟩. Define the row-major vectorization operator on a matrixMinC d×d as
vecr(M) :=
d−1∑
i=0
M|i⟩⊗|i⟩.
Consider a bipartite Hilbert spaceH=H 1⊗H 2, with dimensions2m andn, respectively.
Recall that any (parametrized) unitary matrixU(θ)∈C 2m+n can be decomposed into
U(θ) =
d2
∑
i=1
λiVi(θ)⊗W i(θ),
by the operator Schmidt decomposition, with{Vi}and{W i}being sets of unitary opera-
tors orthogonal w.r.t. the Frobenius inner product, belonging toH1 andH 2, respectively.
Furthermoreλi≥0, ∑
iλ2
i = 1, andd 2 = min{(2m)2,n 2}.
Consider now the circuit in Figure 8. Partition the circuit into two subsystems. The
first corresponding to the first auxiliary2mqubits and the second corresponding to the last
2 log2(n)qubits. The mixed state corresponding the the last2 log2(n)qubits is,
ρ(θ) = 1
n
d2
∑
i=1
λ2
i vecr (Wi(θ)) vecr (Wi(θ))†.(2)
Furthermore, measuring the last2 log2(n)qubits one obtains the following. Let,
pij(θ) :=nTr(ρ(θ)|ij⟩⟨ij|) =
d2
∑
k=1
λ2
k⟨i|
(
Wk(θ)⊙ Wk(θ)
)
|j⟩(3)
fori,j∈[0..n−1]. Let{e i}be the set of canonical basis vectors (with indexistarting
from 0) for the vector spaceRn. Then the matrix
ˆPθ =
n−1∑
i,j=0
pij(θ)eie⊤
j =
n−1∑
i,j=0
pij(θ)|i⟩⟨j|,(4)
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.21

=== PAGE BREAK ===

is doubly stochastic.
Proposition 7 tells us that given the density matrixρ(θ)prepared as in Eq.(2), the
expectations w.r.t. the observables|ij⟩⟨ij|provide the corresponding(i,j)entry of ˆPθ,
and this ˆPθ is doubly stochastic (in fact, unistochastic).
Form= 0, andU(θ)∈Π n, then ˆPθ =U(θ)⊙ U(θ) =U(θ). Which is true, since the
entries of a permutation matrix are only0or1.
Form>0, one can see the role of the auxiliarymqubits, that is enlarging the function
space as a result of the convex combination of density matrices in Eq.(2). Ifm= 0, then
the number of terms in Eq.(2)reduces to 1, while form>0, the number of is much larger
(in fact, one can prove that all but two of theλi must be positive [37]).
Having discussed how to generate doubly-stochastic matrices, we are now ready to see
how to enlarge the number of explored permutations in our ansatze.
5.2 Increasing the number of explored permutations
As we have observed in Theorem 6, the number of spanned permutation scales as2O(q2)
ifq= 2 n is the number of qubits used to represent a permutation matrix of dimension
n. This is the best we can do with local gates, but not quite close to the total number of
permutationsn!, as we can see on Table 1.
The idea is now to enlarge the spanned space by adding extra qubits as in the circuit
in Figure 8, with the unitaries that we have constructed in Section 4. With this, we can
obtain the following advantages.
First, by Eq.(2), we can see that the number of convex combination augments, giving
us the hope that adding addition qubits is similar to spanning a much larger space and
then projecting it onto our problem spacen. This hope is supported by theory (below)
and simulation studies.
Second, since to compute the optimization costf(P)will typically involveO(n2)arith-
metic operations as well as storage, a unitary inCn×n is classically simulatable by the same
computer. By increasing the number of qubits and choosingm≫n, then our unitaries will
cease to be classically simulatable (even though the cost will remain so) and the algorithm
derived upon them will be genuinely quantum.
To support the first advantage, we can now prove a useful theoretical result, which
characterizes the output ˆPθ, wheneverU(θ)is a permutation matrix. Specifically, we
choose the Bruhat unitary,UBruhat(θ), and the Borel unitary,UBorel(θ), both obtained in
Section 4, and reported in Figure 9, for simplicity.
Proposition 8.Consider the circuit in Figure 8, with unitariesU(θ)taken asUBorel(θ),
orU Bruhat(θ). Letθ∈{0,π} ℓ for all theℓparameters, so that the unitary represent a
permutation matrix and recalln= 2q. Then,
ˆPθ =
w∑
i=1
λiPi, P i∈span(Bruhat n),
withw >1wheneverm >0, i.e., ˆPθ is a convex combination of permutation matrices
belonging to the set of permutations in the Bruhat span of dimensionn. In addition,
U Bruhat(θ) :w≤max{2 3mq,|span(Bruhatn)|};
U Borel(θ) :w≤max{2 mq,|span(Bruhatn)|}.
Finally, the number of distinct ˆPθ is at most equal to the cardinality of the Bruhat span
of dimensionn2m = 2q+m.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.22

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Proof.The proof is based on the operator Schmidt decomposition ofcxandswapgates,
which are the gates that connects thempart to thenpart of the circuit. Whenever
there is a connecting gate, either the parameter is0, and the gate is the identity, or the
parameter isπand we have acxor aswapdepending on the parametrized connecting
gate. Up to a renormalization, we have
cx≃|0⟩⟨0|⊗I+|1⟩⟨1|⊗X,andswap≃I⊗I+X⊗X+Y⊗Y+Z⊗Z,
see for instance [38]. Since the decomposition involves only matrices which have one non-
zero elements per row and column, whose modulus is1, then,Wi(θ)⊙Wi(θ)in Eq. (3) is a
permutation matrix obtained combining local gates. Specifically, theY’s will act asXand
theZ’s act asIin the SWAP gate. This implies that the number of distinctWi(θ)⊙Wi(θ)
matrices is upper bounded by the span of the cardinality of the Bruhat span of dimension
n. The number of terms in the convex combination is also upper bounded by the number
of splits caused by connecting gates. The number of connecting gates are3mqfor Bruhat
andmqfor Borel, giving an upper bound of23mq and2 mq, respectively.
Finally, any locally constructed permutationU(θ)in2 q+m dimension will be among
the ones in the Bruhat permutation set of dimensionn2m. Each of them will give rise to
a different operator Schmidt decomposition and henceforth we can count the maximum
number of distinct ˆPθ.
A few remarks are in order.
Remark5.1.Whenever an ancilla is used, ˆPθ will be a doubly-stochastic matrix, even if
U(θ)was a permutation matrix in2m +n(i.e., all theθ’s were either0orπ). This is not
a problem, since we know how to project onto the permutation matrices classically (see
below and [22, 23]).
Remark5.2.Due to the number of unique ˆPθ, wheneverUis a permutation, one can
compute a lower bound on the number of required ancilla qubits (imagining that each
doubly-stochastic matrix maps into a unique permutation) to span the set of permutations
actingnsymbols, which gives us
2(m+log2(n))2
≈n! =⇒m≳Ω(
√
nlogn).
This lower bound is quadratically lower than the number of qubits required inQaoa[39].
Inaddition, herewehavethechoiceofselectinghowmuchofthesetwespanbyaugmenting
or reducing the number of used ancillas. This tuning knob gives us the power to trade-off
span and implementability on current hardware, which has no parallel inQaoa.
Remark5.3.Due to the presence of the operator Schmidt decomposition characterizing
the exact span ofˆPθ is challenging to do, but the interested reader can see some interesting
works in this respect [40, 41, 37].
5.3 ConsideredU(θ)and empirical quantum boost
We can now explore by numerical simulations the total number of unique permutations
generated by our quantum circuit (Figure 8) with a few different unitariesU(θ). For
comparison, we use the Bruhat unitary,U Bruhat(θ), and the Borel unitary,U Borel(θ),
both obtained in Section 4, and reported here in Figure 9.
The Borel unitary is explored here since, for some applications, it could be beneficial to
have a weaker circuit, spanning less permutations, but in return that requires less classical
parameters, and have a shallower depth relatively to the number of parameters.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.23

=== PAGE BREAK ===

θ1 θ7
θ2 θ4 θ8 θ10
θ3 θ5 θ6 θ9 θ11 θ12
ϕ1 ϕ4 ϕ6
ϕ2 ϕ5
ϕ3
θ1
θ2 θ4
θ3 θ5 θ6
ψ1
ψ2
ψ3
ψ4
CX(ψ)
W(ϕ)
B(θ)
B(θ ′)
U(θ) Bruhat
ψ1
ψ2
ψ3
ψ4
CX(ψ)
B(θ)
U(θ) Borel
Figure 9: Depiction of the proposed ansatze for four qubits. With a slight abuse of notation, in
bothU(θ), the parametersθcollect all the parameters in the ansatz. For example for Bruhat,θ:=
{ψ,θ,ϕ,θ ′}. Single qubit gates with one angle indicaterxgates.
We also use a widely used unitary that has been proposed in the context of quantum
machine learning: the Strong Entangling Layer (SEL) unitary [42] as baseline.
We report in Figures 10 and 11 the obtained spans performing one projection into
the permutation set ifm >0. Both figures feature the number of spanned permutations
depending on the number of parameters that we have in the circuit. For each number of
parametersℓ, we consider either all the possible combinations of the parameters in{0,π},
i.e.,2 ℓ, or250,000samples among them, whichever is the lowest. As such, we consider
discrete parameters: this fits the presented theory and the practical results, as we introduce
regularization terms in the optimization problem to force the parameters in{0,π}.
As we can observe in the figures, form= 0, the Bruhat ansatz performs the best,
obtaining the best we can achieve. Form >0, all the ansatze perform similarly and
offer a significant boost in spanned permutations, arriving close4 to the total number of
permutation8! = 40,320. Interestingly, the boost in performance, which we could call as
quantum boost, since form>0we are in a genuine quantum regime, is nearly identical for
m= 1andm= 2and depends quite closely on the number of parameters as2 ℓ (i.e., the
number of distinct possibilities). As such, for the same number of parametersℓ, quantum
circuits with greaterm’s will be shorter than the ones with lowerm’s.
The similarities of the behavior for differentm’s is due to the low number of considered
qubits forn= 8. As discussed in Proposition 8, we know that the number of spanned
permutation will be at most,
min
{
2ℓ,2
q′(q′+1)
2
q′
∏
k=1
(2k−1),n!
}
, q ′ = log2(n) +m,
thereby indicating a difference in performance for differentm’s starting fromn= 16. To
test this, we run the Bruhat’s ansatz withq= 4andm= 0,1,2over400millions different
4The larger span form= 1is obtained by Bruhat at40,199and form= 2by Borel and SEL at40,243
with a Bruhat at40,234.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.24

=== PAGE BREAK ===

parameterizations5 ofθ, and counted the number of distinct permutations returned. We
observe in Figure 12 that increasingmsignificantly improves the span of the circuit by one
or two orders of magnitude, thereby empirically validating our approach.
2 3 4 5
Number of parameters
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Ratio of spanned permutations
m = 0
2 5 8 11
Number of parameters
m = 1
2 6 10 14 18
Number of parameters
m = 2
Borel
Bruhat
SEL
Figure 10: Ratio of the spanned permutations as a function of the number of parameters forq= 2,
i.e.,n= 4. The lines are shifted slightly horizontally for better readability. Recall that the Bruhat span
ofnis24andn! = 24.
2 4 6 8 10 12
Number of parameters
0.0001
0.001
1344
40320
0.1
0.5
1.0
Ratio of spanned permutations
m = 0
2 6 10 14 18 22
Number of parameters
m = 1
2 6 10 14 18 22
Number of parameters
m = 2
Borel
Bruhat
SEL
2𝓁
Figure 11: Ratio of the spanned permutations as a function of the number of parameters forq= 3,
i.e.,n= 8. The lines are shifted slightly horizontally for better readability. Recall that the Bruhat span
ofnis1,344,n! = 40,320, while the Bruhat span ofn×2 1 is322,560.
6 Application to optimization problems
We are now ready to see how to use our quantum circuit to the resolution of permutation-
based optimization problems as Problem(1). We will focus on quadratic assignment prob-
lems and graph isomorphism.
In all the problems, we will use theAdamoptimizer to optimize classically for theθ.
We will also use a projection-onto-the-permutations technique discussed in Appendix C.
5Sinceθ∈ {0,π} ℓ, there are2 ℓ distinct parameterizations (∼10 6 form= 0,∼10 10 form= 1
and∼10 15 form= 2) and∼2×10 13 possible permutations. There are too many of them to explore
exhaustively as we did for2and3qubits.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.25

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Figure 12: Number of permutations spanned as a function of the number of vectors of parameters
sampled forq= 4, i.e.,n= 16, plotted using a standard and a log-log scaling. The dashed horizontal
line indicates the order of the groupLX4, i.e., the Bruhat span forq= 4andn= 16.
6.1 Quadratic assignment problem
The first optimization problem we consider is the quadratic assignment problem [43] (or
QAP for short), for which we can set in Problem(1), the objective functionfgiven by
f(P) := tr
(
WPD⊤P⊤
)
,
whereWandDare two matrices inR n×n. While there exist more general formulations
of the problem (as well as polynomial generalization) [44, 45], the cost we have selected is
general enough to consider most of the interesting instances appeared in the literature.
The quadratic assignment problem is an important problem in combinatorial opti-
mization, with widespread use in practice and whose research stays very active [46]. For
example, the travel salesperson problem is an instance of the QAP. Moreover, the QAP is
NP-hard, and even finding anε-approximation is intractable.
Theorem 7(Sahni and Gonzalez [47, 48]).The quadratic assignment problem is strongly
NP-hard. Moreover, for an anyε>0, the existence of a polynomial timeε-approximation
algorithm for the quadratic assignment problem impliesP=NP.
It was later shown by Pardalos, Rendl and Wolkowicz [49] that even finding a locally
optimal solution, relatively to some specific neighborhood structure, is among the hardest
local search problems. For a comprehensive examination of the quadratic assignment
problem, see the survey of Burkard, Çela, Pardalos and Pitsoulis [48].
6.2 Quantum QAP solver:QuPer
We implement our code in python and use the package Pennylane [50] for quantum com-
putations. All the circuits are simulated exactly. We have implemented three different
ansatze, the Borel, the Bruhat, and the SEL.
As depicted in Figure 1, we can think of the whole quantum circuit as a mapping
θ↦→ˆPθ, with ˆPθ being a doubly stochastic matrix. We therefore aim at minimizing the
following objective function
ℓ(θ) :=f( ˆPθ) = tr
(
W ˆPθD⊤ ˆP⊤
θ
)
,
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.26

=== PAGE BREAK ===

which is a non-standard non-convex continuous relaxation of the objective function of
quadratic assignment problems. To guide the circuit to return doubly stochastic matrices
that are closed to permutations, we regularize this objective function, which becomes
ℓR(θ) =ℓ(θ) + 1
10st( ˆPθ) + 15
100Sε( ˆPθ) + 1
100ort( ˆPθ)
with 


st( ˆPθ) = ∑n
j=1
(∑n
i=1
[
ˆPθ
]
ij
−1
)2
,
Sε( ˆPθ) =− ∑n
i,j=1
[
ˆPθ log
(
ˆPθ +ε
)]
ij
,
ort( ˆPθ) = ∑n
i,j=1
(
ˆP⊤
θ ˆPθ−I
)2
.
Each additional term helps at forcingˆPθ to be a permutation, and at smoothing the loss
landscape of the objective function.
We search for a minimum ofℓR usingAdamwith Nesterov momentum, so that the
vector of parametersθ(k) at stepkis updated according to the following rule
θ(k+1) =θ (k)−ηk
µ(k)
√
ν(k) +ε
with
{
µ(k) =β 1µ(k−1) + (1−β 1)gk,
ν(k) =β 2ν(k−1) + (1−β 2)g2
k,
as well as µ(k) = β1
1−β k+1
1
µ(k) + 1−β 1
1−β k
1
gt and ν(k) = ν(k)
1−β k
2
,
withg k =∇ θℓR(θ(k−1))and the usual hyperparameters fixed at
η= 0.005, β 1 = 0.9, β 2 = 0.999,andε= 10 −8.
At every iteration we transform the double stochastic matrixˆPθ in two different ways:
•by solving a linear assignment problem using the Hungarian algorithm,
•by taking the permutation that alters the order of the entries of a randomly drawn
vector the same way as the double stochastic matrixˆPθ, as explained in Appendix C.
We then evaluate the original loss functionℓat both permutations, keep the minimum of
the two, and then compare with the best permutation currently known.
We initialize the parametersθby drawing them around the center of the span with
some uniform distribution. Since the ansatz with a given ancillam>0contains the ansatz
with ancillam−1, we initialize the parametersθofmwith the ones ofm−1whenever
they are accessible (this last step is not necessary, but it helps having consistent results).
The resulting algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1 and is calledQuPer.
Algorithm 1QuPer
Require:Ansatz, number of ancilla qubitm∗, number of iterationsI
1:Defineθ (0) uniformly in π
2±0.05according to the chosen ansatz
2:formin{0,...,m ∗}do
3:whileconvergence not reacheddo▷We setI= 1000iterations
4:θ (k+1)←Adam(θ (k))▷Adamcalls the quantum circuit
5:get ˜Pby projecting ˆPθ(k+1) following Appendix C
6:get˜vby evaluating the cost classically
7:if˜v <vthen
8:v←˜v,P← ˜P
9:returnv,P ▷We returned the results for eachm
10:pad the finalθwith π
8 for the gates that will be added with the increment ofm
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.27

=== PAGE BREAK ===

6.2.1 Numerical results: QAPlib
We start by testingQuPeron instances of QAP collected in the QAPlib benchmark
repository [51]. The instances range from small scalen= 16to large scalen= 256and
beyond, the largest havingn= 729vertices. The instances are known to be hard, and for
some of them we do not know the optimal permutation value. We consider all the solved
instances in the benchmark for the following number of nodesn∈{16,32,64,128,256},
which have{12,7,2,1,1}instances, respectively.
We compareQuPerwith two baselines. First, we use a state-of-the-art classical heuris-
tic [52], which is implemented in Python via SciPy. The heuristic solves a sequential con-
vexification of the quadratic assignment problem, by relaxing the permutation constraint
into a double stochastic matrix constraint and then using the Frank-Wolfe algorithm to
solve the resulting continuous convex problem. Then they would project onto the permu-
tation set by a linear assignment problem. In this context, the heuristic of [52] is close in
spirit to our quantum heuristic, even though we span the set differently6. This algorithm
has an empirical complexity ofO(n3), with small leading constants (∼10−9).
Second, we implement a naive random method, which draws permutations randomly.
The number of random trials is set to be equal to the number of random projections we
perform inQuPer:50⌈ I
10⌉, which is generally small compared to the permutation set.
Figure 13: Numerical comparisons on instances taken from QAPlib. ‘heuristic’ denotes the classical
heuristic [52] and ‘random’ the naive random method. We present here the mean over the instances
and the95%confidence interval. The full results are available in Appendix D.
In Figure 13 and Figure 14, we report the results for our algorithm in different settings
as well as the other baselines. The results are reported in terms of the relative optimality
gap, defined as,
relative optimality gap=f( ˜P)−f ∗
f∗ ,
since for these instances we know the optimal solution valuef∗.
6We notice that the classical heuristic in [52] is not necessarily the best on every problem, other exists
in the literature, but it is quite robust, it can scale quite well and serves to us as a baseline.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.28

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Figure 14: Numerical comparison on instances taken from QAPlib of the value of the loss functions,
and the cost associated to the two different permutations obtained from the current doubly stochastic
matrix returned by the circuit. Vertical dashed lines indicate the iterations at which an additional ancilla
qubit is introduced in the variational ansatz. The full results are available in Appendix D.
As we can see,QuPerachieves good performance compared to the classical heuris-
tic [52] and it is better than the naive random method. For some instances,QuPer
outperforms the classical algorithm (n={16,64,256}), for the others, the classical algo-
rithm appears to be better. We can also see the quantum benefit of using am>0(since
the ansatz atm+ 1includes the one atm, a greatermis always not worse, provided the
classical optimizer can optimize the parameters exactly). The choice of ansatz seems to
have a smaller influence on the result, but in general we think this is mainly due to the
difficulty of the classical optimizer to optimize, rather than the expressivity of the ansatz.
Figure 13 and the accompanying Appendix D depict a quantum algorithm (QuPer)
which can tackle large instances, it has good potential, and it could be in par with classical
heuristics on difficult QAP instances. For reference, the largest circuit that we have used
for the casen= 256,m= 2has20qubits. Interesting future work here would be to
bringQuPeronto HPC architectures and simulate large instances with largem, where we
expect a clearer quantum benefit. Also, for largem, we may experience a more favorable
optimization landscape, due to over-parametrization.
6.2.2 Numerical results: Random instances
We move on to evaluateQuPeron random instances, generated by drawing the elements
of matricesWandDuniformly between0and10.
We compare the naive random method andQuPerwith the Borel ansatz as a percent-
age difference with respect to the classical heuristic. We report the results in Figure 15.
As we can see,QuPeris competitive on random instances and it is generally better than
the classical heuristic forn= 8. We believe that the fact that the performance ofQuPer
degrades for larger instances is mainly due to the classical optimizer, which fails to find a
better minimum.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.29

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Figure 15: Numerical comparisons on10uniformly drawn random instances (5for n = 128) with respect
to the classical heuristic [52]. We present here the mean and the 95% confidence interval.
6.3 Graph isomorphism problem
The second optimization problem we study is the graph isomorphism problem [53], for
which we can set in Problem(1), the objective functionfgiven by
f(P) :=∥A−PBP ⊤∥2
F,
whereA,B∈ {0,1} n×n are the adjacency matrix of two undirected graphsAandB,
respectively, both withnvertices and∥·∥ F is the Frobenius norm. An example of a graph
isomorphism problem instance is given in Figure 16. We remark here that we could already
tackle the harder sub-graph isomorphism problem with a similar formulation, but we focus
on the easier graph isomorphism for simplicity.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
Figure 16: Two isomorphic graphs withP= (4 6 7 0 1 3 5 2).
The graph isomorphism problem has numerous applications when data can be repre-
sented as networks [54, 55, 56]. Mathematically, the graph isomorphism problem is not
known to beNP-hard in general [57], even though is still hard to solve in practice. How-
ever, many classical algorithms exist tailored to different real-word graphs and instances
that can deal with graphs with thousands to millions of vertices and edges [58, 56, 59, 60].
We choose to focus here on the graph isomorphism to provide a quantum comparison of
our approach to the amplitude encoding methodology presented in [12], which we expect
to be somewhat of similar performance. It is also worth noticing that graph problems
are reasonable to encode on photonic quantum computers [61], thereby making a good
benchmark for future comparison of different technologies. Finally, we remark that a
Qaoaapproach to this problem, tempted in [62], requiresO(n2)qubits, which immediately
requires≈10 12 qubit machines to hope to match current classical results.
6.3.1 Numerical results
We report numerical results to compare ourQuPeralgorithm to other baselines. We use
the classical heuristic [52] as before as a classical baseline, and the variational algorithm
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.30

=== PAGE BREAK ===

of [12] as a quantum baseline. In the latter, we substitute their ansatz forPwith our
ansatze for a fairer comparison.
The graph isomorphism problem can be seen as a variant of a QAP [52]. In fact,
∥A−PBP ⊤∥2
F = tr((A−PBP ⊤)⊤(A−PBP ⊤))
= tr((A−PBP ⊤)(A−PBP ⊤))
by symmetry of the adjacency matricesAandB, next
∥A−PBP ⊤∥2
F = tr(A⊤A−A ⊤PBP⊤−PBP ⊤A+PB ⊤P⊤PBP⊤)
= tr(A⊤A)−tr(A ⊤PBP⊤)−tr(PBP ⊤A) + tr(PB⊤BP⊤).
We use the symmetry and the linearity of the trace operator to conclude with
∥A−PBP ⊤∥2
F = tr(A⊤A) + 2tr(AP(−B)P⊤) + tr(B⊤B)≃tr(AP(−B)P ⊤).
Where≃here stands for equivalence when optimized over. The latter is a QAP with
W=AandD=−B.
We generate graphsArandomly by sampling a Bernoulli distribution with a certain
probability of1set to0.5. The corresponding graphBis generated by drawing a random
permutation and applying it toA. The settings of the different algorithms is the same as
in the QAP results. The step size ofAdamis adjusted to0.4.
In Figure 17, we report the numerical results forn∈{4,6,8,12,16}comparing the vari-
ational quantum approach of [12] where we have used our ansatze: Borelms and Bruhatms,
for theirP, and ourQuPerwith Borel and Bruhat with different ancillasm. The com-
parison is with a normalized version of the heuristic gap, i.e.,
normalized heuristic gap= quantum result−heuristic classical result of [52]
n2/2 .
The normalization is done with respect to the worst case error (and not with respect to
the heuristic classical result, since it is often0).
Figure 17: Numerical comparisons on10random instances of the graph isomorphism problem, with
respect to the classical heuristic [52]. We present here the mean over the instances and the 95%
confidence interval. The labels ‘borel_gip’ and ‘bruhat_gip’ represent the approach of [12] with these
ansatze, while ‘borel_qap’ and ‘bruhat_qap’ represent the new circuits introduced in this paper.
By Figure 17, one can appreciate how ourQuPeris competitive with respect the
classical approach, especially for small instances, and it is better than the approach of [12].
In larger instances,QuPeris less competitive, but as before, we think this is mainly due
to the difficulties of the classical optimizerAdamto solve non-convex problems.
We then conclude our simulations testing the case in which the graphBis generated
by a permutation which is in the span of Bruhat. The results are presented in Figure 18,
which shows better results than a general permutation, further advocating the need for an
optimal spanning ansatz.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.31

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Figure 18: Numerical comparisons on10random instances of the graph isomorphism problem when
the permutation lies in the span of Bruhat.
7 Conclusions
We have presented a variational quantum method to solve permutation-based optimiza-
tion problems. The method is based on an optimal ansatz, with ancilla qubits, that can
generate doubly-stochastic matrices. The resulting circuit is tunable and requires at least
a number of qubits that scales only logarithmically with the number of variables. We have
discussed and developed the theory behind the circuit generation and shown numerically
its competitiveness on several optimization problems. We demonstrate that we can be
in par with classical heuristics (typically for small instances but not only), and perform
better than other quantum algorithms (on simpler problems, where those algorithms ex-
ist). The circuit that we generate is very general and adapted to any permutation-based
optimization problems, which we will set forth to investigate in future work.
References
[1] Edward Farhi, Jeffrey Goldstone, and Sam Gutmann. “A quantum approximate opti-
mization algorithm” (2014). arXiv:1411.4028.
[2] Leo Zhou, Sheng-Tao Wang, Soonwon Choi, Hannes Pichler, and Mikhail D. Lukin.
“Quantum approximate optimization algorithm: Performance, mechanism, and imple-
mentation on near-term devices”. Phys. Rev. X10, 021067 (2020).
[3] Amira Abbas, Andris Ambainis, Brandon Augustino, Andreas Bärtschi, Harry
Buhrman, Carleton Coffrin, Giorgio Cortiana, Vedran Dunjko, Daniel J. Egger,
Bruce G. Elmegreen, Nicola Franco, Filippo Fratini, Bryce Fuller, Julien Gacon, Con-
stantin Gonciulea, Sander Gribling, Swati Gupta, Stuart Hadfield, Raoul Heese, Ger-
hard Kircher, Thomas Kleinert, Thorsten Koch, Georgios Korpas, Steve Lenk, Jakub
Marecek, Vanio Markov, Guglielmo Mazzola, Stefano Mensa, Naeimeh Mohseni, Gi-
acomo Nannicini, Corey O’Meara, Elena Peña Tapia, Sebastian Pokutta, Manuel
Proissl, Patrick Rebentrost, Emre Sahin, Benjamin C. B. Symons, Sabine Tornow,
Víctor Valls, Stefan Woerner, Mira L. Wolf-Bauwens, Jon Yard, Sheir Yarkoni, Dirk
Zechiel, Sergiy Zhuk, and Christa Zoufal. “Challenges and opportunities in quantum
optimization”. Nature Reviews Physics6, 718–735 (2024).
[4] SamiBoulebnaneandAshleyMontanaro. “Solvingbooleansatisfiabilityproblemswith
the quantum approximate optimization algorithm”. PRX Quantum5, 030348 (2024).
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.32

=== PAGE BREAK ===

[5] Ruslan Shaydulin, Changhao Li, Shouvanik Chakrabarti, Matthew DeCross, Dylan
Herman, Niraj Kumar, Jeffrey Larson, Danylo Lykov, Pierre Minssen, Yue Sun, Yuri
Alexeev, Joan M. Dreiling, John P. Gaebler, Thomas M. Gatterman, Justin A. Gerber,
Kevin Gilmore, Dan Gresh, Nathan Hewitt, Chandler V. Horst, Shaohan Hu, Jacob
Johansen, Mitchell Matheny, Tanner Mengle, Michael Mills, Steven A. Moses, Brian
Neyenhuis, Peter Siegfried, Romina Yalovetzky, and Marco Pistoia. “Evidence of
scalingadvantageforthequantumapproximateoptimizationalgorithmonaclassically
intractable problem”. Science Advances10, eadm6761 (2024).
[6] Scott Aaronson. “Quantum advantage for NP approximation? for REAL this time?”.
https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=8375(2024). Blog post.
[7] Dimitris Bertsimas and Jack Dunn. “Optimal classification trees”. Machine Learning
106, 1039–1082 (2017).
[8] Daniel Rehfeldt, Thorsten Koch, and Yuji Shinano. “Faster exact solution of sparse
MaxCut and QUBO problems”. Mathematical Programming Computation15, 445–
470 (2023).
[9] Manuela Weigold, Johanna Barzen, Frank Leymann, and Marie Salm. “Encoding
patterns for quantum algorithms”. IET Quantum Communication2, 141–152 (2021).
[10] Javier Gonzalez-Conde, Thomas W. Watts, Pablo Rodriguez-Grasa, and Mikel
Sanz. “Efficient quantum amplitude encoding of polynomial functions”. Quantum
8, 1297 (2024).
[11] Marko J. Rančić. “Noisy intermediate-scale quantum computing algorithm for solv-
ing an n-vertex maxcut problem with log(n) qubits”. Physical Review Research5,
l012021 (2023).
[12] Nicola Mariella and Andrea Simonetto. “A quantum algorithm for the sub-graph
isomorphism problem”. ACM Transactions on Quantum Computing4, 1–34 (2023).
[13] Zhihui Wang, Nicholas C. Rubin, Jason M. Dominy, and Eleanor G. Rieffel. “Xy
mixers: Analyticalandnumericalresultsforthequantumalternatingoperatoransatz”.
Physical Review A101, 012320 (2020).
[14] Franz Georg Fuchs, Kjetil Olsen Lye, Halvor Møll Nilsen, Alexander Johannes Stasik,
and Giorgio Sartor. “Constraint preserving mixers for the quantum approximate op-
timization algorithm”. Algorithms15, 202 (2022).
[15] Hannes Leipold, Federico M. Spedalieri, Stuart Hadfield, and Eleanor Rieffel. “Impos-
ing constraints on driver hamiltonians and mixing operators: From theory to practical
implementation” (2024). arXiv:2407.01975.
[16] Samuel Marsh and Jingbo B. Wang. “Combinatorial optimization via highly efficient
quantum walks”. Physical Review Research2, 023302 (2020).
[17] Claudio Gambella and Andrea Simonetto. “Multiblock admm heuristics for mixed-
binary optimization on classical and quantum computers”. IEEE Transactions on
Quantum Engineering1, 1–22 (2020).
[18] Maike Drieb-Schön, Kilian Ender, Younes Javanmard, and Wolfgang Lechner. “Parity
quantum optimization: Encoding constraints”. Quantum7, 951 (2023).
[19] Hyakka Nakada, Kotaro Tanahashi, and Shu Tanaka. “Inductive construction
of variational quantum circuit for constrained combinatorial optimization” (2025).
arXiv:2501.03521.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.33

=== PAGE BREAK ===

[20] Josu Ceberio, Ekhine Irurozki, Alexander Mendiburu, and Jose A. Lozano. “A review
onestimationofdistributionalgorithmsinpermutation-basedcombinatorialoptimiza-
tion problems”. Progress in Artificial Intelligence1, 103–117 (2012).
[21] Nicola Mariella, Albert Akhriev, Francesco Tacchino, Christa Zoufal, Juan Carlos
Gonzalez-Espitia, Benedek Harsanyi, Eugene Koskin, Ivano Tavernelli, Stefan Wo-
erner, Marianna Rapsomaniki, Sergiy Zhuk, and Jannis Born. “Quantum theory and
application of contextual optimal transport”. In Proceedings of the 41st International
Conference on Machine Learning. (2024). arXiv:2402.14991v3.
[22] Fajwel Fogel, Rodolphe Jenatton, Francis Bach, and Alexandre d’Aspremont. “Con-
vex relaxations for permutation problems”. SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and
Applications36, 1465–1488 (2015).
[23] Alexander Barvinok. “Approximating orthogonal matrices by permutation matrices”.
Pure and Applied Mathematics Quarterly2, 943–961 (2006).
[24] Marc Bataille. “Quantum circuits ofcnotgates: optimization and entanglement”.
Quantum Information Processing21, 269 (2022).
[25] Dmitri Maslov and Martin Roetteler. “Shorter stabilizer circuits via bruhat decom-
position and quantum circuit transformations”. IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory64, 4729–4738 (2018).
[26] Dimitri P. Bertsekas. “Auction algorithms for network flow problems: A tutorial
introduction”. Computational Optimization and Applications1, 7–66 (1992).
[27] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A method for stochastic optimiza-
tion” (2014). arXiv:1412.6980.
[28] David Steven Dummit and Richard M. Foote. “Abstract algebra”. Wiley Hoboken.
(2004). Third edition.
[29] David Lawrence Johnson. “Presentations of groups”. Number 15 in London Mathe-
matical Society Student Texts. Cambridge university press. (1997).
[30] RobertSteinberg. “LecturesonChevalleygroups”. Volume66. AmericanMathematical
Society. (2016).
[31] François Bruhat and Jacques Tits. “Groupes réductifs sur un corps local: I. don-
nées radicielles valuées”. Publications Mathématiques de l’Institut des Hautes Études
Scientifiques41, 5–251 (1972).
[32] Nicolas Bourbaki. “Groupes et algèbres de Lie: Chapitres 4, 5 et 6”. Springer Berlin,
Heidelberg. (1968).
[33] Jacques Tits. “Buildings of Spherical Type and Finite BN-Pairs”. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg. (1974).
[34] Emil Artin. “Geometric algebra”. Wiley Classics Series. (1988).
[35] Anders Björner and Francesco Brenti. “Combinatorics of Coxeter groups”. Volume
231. Springer. (2005).
[36] Elisa Bäumer and Stefan Woerner. “Measurement-based long-range entangling gates
in constant depth”. Physical Review Research7, 023120 (2025).
[37] Alexander Müller-Hermes and Ion Nechita. “Operator Schmidt ranks of bipartite
unitary matrices”. Linear Algebra and its Applications557, 174–187 (2018).
[38] Mark W. Coffey and Ron Deiotte. “Relation of operator Schmidt decomposition and
CNOT complexity”. Quantum Information Processing7, 117–124 (2008).
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.34

=== PAGE BREAK ===

[39] Adam Glos, Aleksandra Krawiec, and Zoltán Zimborás. “Space-efficient binary opti-
mization for variational quantum computing”. npj Quantum Information8, 39 (2022).
[40] Lin Chen and Li Yu. “Entanglement cost and entangling power of bipartite unitary
and permutation operators”. Physical Review A93, 042331 (2016).
[41] Tristan Benoist and Ion Nechita. “On bipartite unitary matrices generating
subalgebra-preserving quantum operations”. Linear Algebra and its Applications521,
70–103 (2017).
[42] Maria Schuld, Alex Bocharov, Krysta M. Svore, and Nathan Wiebe. “Circuit-centric
quantum classifiers”. Physical Review A101, 032308 (2020).
[43] Tjalling C. Koopmans and Martin Beckmann. “Assignment problems and the location
of economic activities”. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society25, 53–
76 (1957).
[44] Eugene L. Lawler. “The quadratic assignment problem”. Management Science9,
586–599 (1963).
[45] Panos M. Pardalos and Leonidas S. Pitsoulis. “Nonlinear Assignment Problems”.
Combinatorial Optimization. Springer Netherlands. (1999).
[46] Zhentao Tan and Yadong Mu. “Learning solution-aware transformers for efficiently
solving quadratic assignment problem”. In Proceedings of the 41st International Con-
ference on Machine Learning. (2024). arXiv:10.48550/arXiv.2406.09899.
[47] Sartaj Sahni and Teofilo Gonzalez. “P-complete approximation problems”. Journal of
the ACM23, 555–565 (1976).
[48] Rainer Ernst Burkard, Eranda Çela, Panos M. Pardalos, and Leonidas S. Pitsoulis.
“The quadratic assignment problem”. In Ding-Zhu Du and Panos M. Pardalos, editors,
Handbook of Combinatorial Optimization. Kluwer Academic Publishers (1998).
[49] Panos M. Pardalos, Franz Rendl, and Henry Wolkowicz. “The quadratic assign-
ment problem: A survey and recent developments”. Technical report. Faculty of
Mathematics, University of Waterloo (1994). url:https://www.math.uwaterloo.
ca/~hwolkowi/henry/reports/qapsurvey94.pdf.
[50] Ville Bergholm, Josh Izaac, Maria Schuld, Christian Gogolin, Shahnawaz Ahmed,
Vishnu Ajith, M Sohaib Alam, Guillermo Alonso-Linaje, B AkashNarayanan, Ali
Asadi, et al. “Pennylane: Automatic differentiation of hybrid quantum-classical com-
putations” (2018). arXiv:10.48550/arXiv.1811.04968.
[51] Rainer E. Burkard, Stefan E. Karisch, and Franz Rendl. “QAPLIB – A Quadratic
Assignment Problem Library”. Journal of Global Optimization10, 391–403 (1997).
[52] Joshua T. Vogelstein, John M. Conroy, Vince Lyzinski, Louis J. Podrazik, Steven G.
Kratzer, Eric T. Harley, Donniell E. Fishkind, R. Jacob Vogelstein, and Carey E.
Priebe. “Fast approximate quadratic programming for graph matching”. PLOS ONE
10, e0121002 (2015).
[53] Béla Bollobás. “Modern Graph Theory”. Springer New York. (1998).
[54] Donatello Conte, Pasquale Foggia, Carlo Sansone, and Mario Vento. “Thirty years of
graph matching in pattern recognition”. International Journal of Pattern Recognition
and Artificial Intelligence18, 265–298 (2004).
[55] Vincenzo Bonnici, Rosalba Giugno, Alfredo Pulvirenti, Dennis Shasha, and Alfredo
Ferro. “A subgraph isomorphism algorithm and its application to biochemical data”.
BMC Bioinformatics14, S13 (2013).
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.35

=== PAGE BREAK ===

[56] Jinsoo Lee, Wook-Shin Han, Romans Kasperovics, and Jeong-Hoon Lee. “An in-depth
comparison of subgraph isomorphism algorithms in graph databases”. Proceedings of
the VLDB Endowment6, 133–144 (2012).
[57] Vikraman Arvind and Johannes Köbler. “Graph isomorphism is low for ZPP(NP)
and other lowness results”. In STACS 2000. Pages 431–442. Springer Berlin Heidel-
berg (2000).
[58] Luigi P. Cordella, Pasquale Foggia, Carlo Sansone, and Mario Vento. “A (sub)graph
isomorphism algorithm for matching large graphs”. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence26, 1367–1372 (2004).
[59] Yonathan Aflalo, Alexander Bronstein, and Ron Kimmel. “On convex relaxation of
graph isomorphism”. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences112, 2942–
2947 (2015).
[60] Chems Eddine Nabti. “Subgraph Isomorphism Search in Massive Graph Data”.
PhD thesis. Université de Lyon. (2018). url:https://theses.hal.science/
tel-01781831v1.
[61] Rawad Mezher, Ana Filipa Carvalho, and Shane Mansfield. “Solving graph problems
with single photons and linear optics”. Physical Review A108, 032405 (2023).
[62] Cristian S. Calude, Michael J. Dinneen, and Richard Hua. “QUBO formulations for
the graph isomorphism problem and related problems”. Theoretical Computer Science
701, 54–69 (2017).
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.36

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Appendices
A Computation complexity considerations
We discuss briefly the computational complexity of [11]. The variational algorithm is an
amplitude encoding, requiringq= log 2(n)qubit to encode a max-cut ofnvariables. How-
ever to compute the observable, one needs to evaluate4q =n 2 circuits, weighted them with
some pre-compute coefficient (involving the trace of a matrix-matrix multiplication) and
then sum them. The total cost isO(n3). In comparison, a classical algorithm that eval-
uatesx⊤Qxrequires onlyO(n 2)floating point operations, thereby making the algorithm
classically simulable.
B Construction of parametrizedcxgate
The reason why we cannot use the controlled rotationx, orcrx, gate in our circuit is that
it introduces some relative phase shift between the control qubit and the target qubit. To
overcome this, we beforehand apply a phase gate on the control qubit, to anticipate the
introduction of the relative phase with thecrxgate. These two gates can be written as
p(θ) =|0⟩⟨0|+e iθ|1⟩⟨1|andcrx(θ) =|0⟩⟨0|⊗id+|1⟩⟨1|⊗rx(θ).
When evaluated atθ= 0, thecrxgate does not introduce any relative phase as it acts
like the identity, but when it is evaluated atθ=πit becomes
crx(π) =|0⟩⟨0|⊗id+|1⟩⟨1|⊗rx(π) =|0⟩⟨0|⊗id−i|1⟩⟨1|⊗x.
We fix this issue by applying the phase gate on the control qubit with half ofθ. We have
θ
=
p(θ/2)
rx(θ)
Figure 19: Construction of thecrxgate introducing no relative phase, using the notation of Figure 3.
claimed that this gate acts like the identity whenθ= 0, which is straightforward, and that
it acts like acxgate whenθ=π. We prove the latter by direct computation. We denote
bykthe control qubit and bylthe target qubit.
crxkl(π)·p k(π/2) =
(
|0⟩⟨0|k⊗idl +|1⟩⟨1|k⊗rxl(π)
)((
|0⟩⟨0|k +eiπ
2|1⟩⟨1|k
)
⊗idl
)
=
(
|0⟩⟨0|k⊗idl−i|1⟩⟨1|k⊗xl
)(
(|0⟩⟨0|k +i|1⟩⟨1|k)⊗id l
)
=|0⟩⟨0|k⊗idl−i·i|1⟩⟨1| k⊗xl
=cx kl.
C Projection onto permutations
Let ˆPbe a doubly-stochastic matrix of dimensionn, i.e., a matrix in[0,1] n×n, whose
columns and rows sum to1. Projecting such a matrix onto the permutation set, we can
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.37

=== PAGE BREAK ===

either use a linear assignment problem (a convex problem) as,
min
P∈Πn
1
2∥ ˆP−P∥ 2
F =−
n∑
i=1
n∑
j=1
( ˆP⊤P)ij,
that we solve using theHungarian algorithm, or a randomized algorithm described in [23,
22]. We explain here the latter as it has in general a better performance on small instances
and is less known.
The randomized algorithm idea is applyˆPto a sorted random vector and see how the
ordering changes. Then one can find a permutation that achieve the same permutation of
ordering. Letvthe initial random vector, andψ(v)its ordering, the idea is to find the
permutationPfor which,
ψ
(
ˆPv
)
=Pψ(v).
In the simulations, we choose to start with a random vectorvdesigned asv i := 2i.
Each coefficient ofvis at least twice or half another coefficient, which prevents values of
ˆPwhich are quite far from1to unexpectedly change the order of the returned vector.
Next, we randomly permutev, apply ˆPto it, and constructPby looking at the
order of the returned vector. We do this50times, so we obtain less than50unique
permutations, closely resembling the one we are looking for. From these, we simply take
the one minimizing the objective function.
This approach is efficient, and allows for the exploration of a larger neighborhood of
the current relaxed solution, compared to the projection that we can have by solving a
linear assignment problem, which does not take into consideration the cost function.
D Full results for QAP
The following figures show the average relative optimality gaps for the different algorithms.
One plot corresponds to a given size of instances. For the size128and256, there is a unique
instance, so there is no vertical bar indicating the interval of confidence.
The following tables includes all the results we obtained on the QAPlib instances of
size a power of two. Their names are written in the first column. So each line represents
a single instance, and the columns represent the different algorithms used to solve the
aforementioned instances.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.38

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Classical Borel Bruhat SEL
Instances Exact Heur. Rand.0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2
esc16a 68 70 84 84 80 80 80 78 78 84 78 78
esc16b 292 320 292 294 294 294 296 292 292 294 294 294
esc16c 160 168 192 178 178 168 182 182 182 188 184 180
esc16d 16 62 26 24 24 16 28 16 16 28 24 24
esc16e 28 30 30 32 32 32 32 32 32 34 34 32
esc16f 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
esc16g 26 30 36 30 30 28 34 34 34 36 36 36
esc16h 996 1518 1066 1026 1026 1026 1026 1026 1026 1036 1030 1030
esc16i 14 14 26 18 18 14 22 22 20 18 14 14
esc16j 8 8 12 12 12 10 12 12 12 12 10 10
nug16a 1610 1660 1916 1860 1860 1854 1878 1778 1778 1866 1866 1844
nug16b 1240 1282 1516 1486 1446 1446 1434 1434 1434 1488 1484 1484
Figure 20: The value of the cost function on different instances of size 16. The integers below ansatze
names indicate the numbermof ancilla qubits used.
Classical Borel Bruhat SEL
Instances Exact Heur. Rand.0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2
kra3288900 92930 126020 120710 118710 115710 117600 114680 114680 122390 122390 122390
esc32a 130 160 338 318 304 304 282 258 258 306 306 306
esc32b 168 196 376 264 256 256 256 256 256 352 304 304
esc32c 642 650 810 702 694 694 706 692 692 776 742 742
esc32d 200 226 294 262 262 262 262 258 254 280 280 272
esc32e 2 2 6 6 6 6 6 6 2 6 6 6
esc32g 6 10 18 12 10 10 12 10 10 8 8 8
Figure 21: The value of the cost function on different instances of size 32. The integers below ansatze
names indicate the numbermof ancilla qubits used.
Classical Borel Bruhat SEL
Inst. Exact Heur. Rand.0 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2
sko64 48498 49102 56450 56564 56482 56482 56120 55592 55592 56880 56612 56582
tai64c 1855928 5893540 2258166 2141126 2141126 2141126 2211470 2181600 2161392 2187554 2133174 2133174
esc128 64 72 262 128 114 114 148 144 134 226 182 182
tai256c 44759294 98685678 50647386 50129154 50129154 50129154 50093960 49437762 49035944 50642900 50140242 50140242
Figure 22: The value of the cost function on different instances of size 64, 128 and 256. The integers
below ansatze names indicate the numbermof ancilla qubits used.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.39

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Figure 23: Values of the cost functions during the optimization process. Each row correspond to a
specific size of instances. For128- and256-vertex graphs, there is a unique instance. Vertical dashed
lines indicate the iterations at which an additional ancilla qubit is introduced in the variational ansatz.
Accepted inQuantum 2026-01-26, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.40