Nature Reviews Physics | Volume 6 | December 2024 | 718–735 718
nature reviews physics
Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42254-024-00770-9
 Check for updates
Challenges and opportunities 
in quantum optimization
Amira Abbas    1,2, Andris Ambainis3, Brandon Augustino4, Andreas Bärtschi    5, Harry Buhrman1,2,6, 
Carleton Coffrin    7, Giorgio Cortiana    8, Vedran Dunjko    9, Daniel J. Egger    10, Bruce G. Elmegreen11, 
Nicola Franco    12, Filippo Fratini    13, Bryce Fuller    14, Julien Gacon    10,15, Constantin Gonciulea16, 
Sander Gribling    17, Swati Gupta4, Stuart Hadfield    18,19, Raoul Heese    20, Gerhard Kircher    13, 
Thomas Kleinert    21, Thorsten Koch    22,23, Georgios Korpas    24,25,26, Steve Lenk    27,28, Jakub Marecek    25, 
Vanio Markov16, Guglielmo Mazzola    29, Stefano Mensa    30, Naeimeh Mohseni    8, Giacomo Nannicini    31, 
Corey O’Meara    8, Elena Peña Tapia10, Sebastian Pokutta    32,33, Manuel Proissl    10, Patrick Rebentrost34, 
Emre Sahin    30, Benjamin C. B. Symons    30, Sabine Tornow    35, Víctor Valls36, Stefan Woerner10 , 
Mira L. Wolf-Bauwens10, Jon Yard37, Sheir Yarkoni    38, Dirk Zechiel21, Sergiy Zhuk    36 & Christa Zoufal    10
Abstract
Quantum computers have demonstrable ability to solve problems at 
a scale beyond brute-force classical simulation. Interest in quantum 
algorithms has developed in many areas, particularly in relation to 
mathematical optimization — a broad field with links to computer 
science and physics. In this Review, we aim to give an overview of 
quantum optimization. Provably exact, provably approximate and 
heuristic settings are first explained using computational complexity 
theory, and we highlight where quantum advantage is possible in 
each context. Then, we outline the core building blocks for quantum 
optimization algorithms, define prominent problem classes and 
identify key open questions that should be addressed to advance 
the field. We underscore the importance of benchmarking by 
proposing clear metrics alongside suitable optimization problems, for 
appropriate comparisons with classical optimization techniques, and 
discuss next steps to accelerate progress towards quantum advantage 
in optimization.
Sections
Introduction
Quantum advantage and 
complexity theory
Problem classes and 
algorithms
Benchmarks
The path towards quantum 
advantage
Outlook
 e-mail: wor@zurich.ibm.comA full list of affiliations appears at the end of the paper.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Nature Reviews Physics | Volume 6 | December 2024 | 718–735
 719
Review article
upfront. This makes comparing quantum and classical algorithms rather 
tricky, given the limitations of what can be run on today’s quantum 
hardware. T o establish systematic, reproducible and comparable bench-
marks, we introduce fair metrics and relevant optimization problems to 
which different algorithms can be applied. This is crucial to identify opti-
mal strategies and guide the development of new quantum optimization 
algorithms. Finally, we propose next steps towards quantum advantage.
Quantum advantage and complexity theory
In theoretical computer science, complexity classes group computa-
tional problems together in terms of the amount of resources, such as 
computational time and memory, required to solve them. Complex-
ity theory is thus often the guiding compass when seeking classes of 
problems that are hard for classical computers to solve, but perhaps 
demand less resource on quantum computers. This is a reasonable 
and rigorous way to formulate a quantum advantage, but proving that 
problems require strictly more resources classically than they would 
on a quantum computer can be a monumental task. Additionally, com-
plexity theory is traditionally concerned with worst-case instances of a 
problem: in practice, the concrete problem instance to be solved might 
be easier than the hardest, worst-case instances14,15. Hence, even when 
worst-case complexity-theoretic results rule out quantum speedups 
for hard problems, quantum computers might still outperform clas-
sical computers for certain classes of problem instance. Our notion of 
quantum advantage in practice should cast the net wider than formal 
proofs and worst-case scenarios, but within a reasonable range guided 
by complexity-theoretic arguments.
Categorizing the complexity of an optimization problem depends 
on its formulation and the desired quality of the solution. Much of 
the complexity theory deals with decision problems, that is, deciding 
whether a particular solution to a problem exists or not. The most 
notable complexity classes containing decision problems are labelled P 
(polynomial time) and NP (non-deterministic polynomial time): P con-
tains the set of decision problems known to require an amount of 
time to solve that grows at most polynomially with the input size; NP 
contains problems whose solutions are verifiable in polynomial time. 
In practice, finding an actual solution to a problem is more important 
than determining its existence. For example, in the TSP, merely know-
ing that there exists a path of a certain length to travel to all cities and 
back is not enough to benefit; the actual path to travel is needed. This 
leads to the notion of relational problems, which generalize decision 
problems and are classified by their own functional complexity classes, 
denoted FP and FNP. The classes PO  ⊂ FP and NPO  ⊂ FNP are the sets 
of optimization problems analogous to P and NP (ref. 16). (A compre-
hensive overview of various complexity classes pertinent for practical 
scenarios is given in the Supplementary information.)
Although it is widely believed that quantum computers will not 
offer exponential speedups for NPO-hard problems (the most difficult 
optimization problems to solve), the story does not end there. An inter-
esting open question is whether quantum algorithms can solve opti-
mization problems that are average-case hard for classical algorithms. 
In particular, problems with a so-called overlap gap property 17 have 
been proven to be average-case hard for certain families of classical 
algorithms (and local low-depth quantum algorithms), but it remains 
unclear whether these problems can be addressed by higher-depth or 
more sophisticated quantum algorithms18–22. If so, this would be very 
convincing evidence for useful superpolynomial quantum advantage, 
given that such problems naturally arise in combinatorial optimization, 
statistical physics and high-dimensional statistics.
Key points
 • Quantum computing is advancing rapidly, and quantum optimization 
is a promising area of application.
 • Quantum optimization algorithms — whether provably exact, 
provably approximate or heuristic — offer opportunities to demonstrate 
quantum advantage.
 • Systematic benchmarking is crucial to guide research, track progress 
and further advance understanding of quantum optimization.
 • Theoretical research and empirical research using real hardware can 
complement each other, in the move towards demonstrating quantum 
advantage.
Introduction
Quantum computing has the potential to revolutionize optimization 
and thereby impact science and numerous businesses. Optimization 
problems arise almost everywhere, and improvements over state-of-
the-art classical algorithms using quantum computers could occur 
across multiple dimensions, such as solution quality, solution diversity, 
time-to-solution and cost-to-solution. But how tangible are the benefits 
of quantum optimization? Grover’s search1, quantum annealing, adiaba-
tic quantum optimization2,3 and the quantum approximate optimiza-
tion algorithm (QAOA)4 provided a promising start, but it has become 
clear that more is needed to realize a practical quantum advantage 
in optimization. Here, we address — for researchers and practition-
ers in quantum computing, optimization and related domains — the 
potential of quantum optimization from various angles: complex -
ity theory, problem classes and algorithmic design, fair and robust 
benchmarking and the next steps towards real-world applications.
For some combinatorial optimization problems in a worst-case 
setting, the required effort using known classical approaches scales 
exponentially with the problem size5. Quantum computers may offer a 
quadratic speedup (for example, via Grover’s search) — but a quadratic 
speedup over an exponential run time is still an exponential run time. 
The situation can, however, change drastically if we consider a concrete 
problem instance instead of the general worst-case scenario. Classi -
cally, many algorithms and heuristics can obtain an (almost) optimal 
solution in a reasonable time, even for some large problems. The most 
prominent example is the travelling salesperson problem (TSP), which 
is often used to illustrate the difficulty of combinatorial optimization 
but, in practice, very large problem instances can be solved close to 
optimality classically6–11. By contrast, there exist problems with fewer 
than 100 variables that are difficult to tackle classically12,13. Although 
quantum optimization algorithms will not necessarily improve perfor-
mance for all instances of a problem, they do provide additional tools 
with new properties that can improve performance for some problem 
instances and thus improve our overall capabilities in optimization. It 
is crucial to understand exactly where advantages might lie, theoreti-
cally and empirically. Furthermore, synergies with classical algorithms 
can certainly improve the performance of quantum algorithms. We 
discuss these points formally, by laying the foundation for quantum 
optimization algorithms within various well-studied problem classes.
In practice, it is often necessary to rely on optimization heuristics, 
in which the performance for given problem instances is not known 

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Nature Reviews Physics | Volume 6 | December 2024 | 718–735 720
Review article
Additionally, in practice, an exact solution to a problem might not 
be required. An approximation to the exact solution is often acceptable, 
leaving room for the possibility of exponential quantum speedups 
in realistic settings. Studying the ability of quantum algorithms to 
approximate solutions — that is, the hardness of approximation with 
quantum computing — raises many questions. For example, there are 
empirical investigations into whether quantum algorithms can achieve 
better approximation ratios (a measure of how close an approximate 
solution is to optimality) than classical methods23–26.
An ‘approximable’ problem is said to belong to the complexity 
class APX, which contains the set of NPO problems for which there 
are polynomial-time approximation algorithms with approximation 
ratios bounded above by some constant c  (ref. 27). An interesting 
subclass of NPO problems that admit a so-called polynomial-time 
approximation scheme is PTAS (refs. 15,16). For any problem in PTAS, 
there is a polynomial-time algorithm that is guaranteed to find a solu-
tion whose value is within a factor 1 + ε of the optimum, in which ε > 0. 
However, there are cases in which the exponent of the polynomial 
might even depend exponentially on 1/ε. T o account for this, the class 
FPTAS — for fully polynomial-time approximation scheme — can be 
considered, which demands a polynomial run time in the input size and 
in 1/ε. The hierarchy of these optimization problem classes is shown in 
Fig. 1, and the hardness of approximation is discussed more formally 
in the Supplementary information. When combined with quantum 
computing, this area makes for an exciting and rather unexplored 
research direction — where quantum algorithms could serve as entirely 
new approaches or improve over existing classical PTAS algorithms.
Relaxing the requirement of a provably approximate solution to 
one deemed ‘good enough’ (by some reasonable standard) enables 
heuristic approaches, which are arguably of greatest practical rel -
evance. Heuristic algorithms are understood as algorithms without 
provable performance or running time guarantees. The success of 
classical heuristic algorithms motivates the study of quantum heuris-
tics. Here, the aim is to design algorithms that leverage quantum com-
putation to provide reasonable solutions to problems where classical 
approaches either cannot or take too long15. The word ‘reasonable’ is 
context-dependent, making heuristic approaches difficult to analyse 
theoretically. Noteworthy efforts are discussed in the Supplementary 
information.
Although substantial progress has been made in the quantum 
and classical complexity theory28–30, the discussion mentioned earlier 
highlights issues that arise when restricting our notion of quantum 
advantage strictly to complexity-theoretic separations in the context 
of optimization. The key takeaway is that understanding complexity 
theory is extremely useful for gauging a possible quantum advan -
tage in optimization, but rigorous complexity-theoretic separations 
are not necessary nor sufficient when seeking a practical quantum 
advantage.
Again, the TSP is an illuminating example. Its most general decision 
version is NP-hard and the optimization version is APX-hard. If the 
problem is restricted to the Euclidean TSP (in which all points are in 
the d-dimensional space dR  and edge weights equal their Euclidean 
distances), then, remarkably, there exists an explicit PTAS to solve such 
TSP instances31. Using heuristic algorithms, it is possible in practice to 
solve TSP problems with millions of nodes. Finally, if we instead con-
sider the shortest-path problem (finding the shortest path between 
two places), we have a problem in P. This illustrates the nuance of 
complexity theory that should be kept in mind when designing quan-
tum optimization algorithms. Importantly, if provable quantum 
speedups seem unattainable, quantum heuristic algorithms might still 
offer meaningful results. But developing quantum heuristic methods 
that exploit structure in a problem, or enhance classical approaches, 
is not straightforward: in Box 1, we lay out various building blocks for 
the careful design of quantum optimization algorithms.
Problem classes and algorithms
Optimization problems can be classified according to, for example, types 
of variables, objective function (functions), constraints and uncertainty.  
A problem can often be modelled in different ways. Although these 
formulations might be equivalent, the choice of formulation can have 
a crucial role in how a problem is solved. Indeed, different formulations 
place more or less emphasis on certain properties of the problem. Fur-
thermore, the available algorithms might only work for certain problem 
classes. In addition, it is crucial to understand how the performance of 
algorithms changes when executed on noisy quantum hardware and how 
instances can be optimally mapped to the hardware to minimize noise. 
Because these questions are difficult to answer, systematic benchmark-
ing is very important. Here, we focus on the most prominent problem 
classes in the literature and discuss available algorithms, based on the 
paradigms mentioned in Box 1. (More details and additional problem 
classes, such as robust optimization or multi-objective optimization, 
are given in the Supplementary information).
Discrete optimization
Unconstrained discrete optimization.  Quadratic unconstrained  
binary optimization (QUBO) is a foundational example of unconstrained  
discrete optimization:
xQ xmin. (1)x
T
∈{0,1}n
Optimization problems
NPO
APX
PTAS
FPTAS
PO
Fig. 1 | Complexity classes for optimization problems. In the hierarchy of 
complexity classes, NPO (which stands for non-deterministic polynomial-time 
optimization) is the set of optimization problems that is analogous to the 
NP class of decision problems, whose solutions are verifiable in polynomial 
time. An ‘approximable’ problem — for which there are polynomial-time 
approximation algorithms with guaranteed approximation ratios — belongs to 
the class APX (for approximable), within NPO and PTAS is a further subset, for 
which polynomial-time algorithms exist that are guaranteed to find a solution 
that is within a predefined factor 1 ± ε of the optimum, in which ε > 0 denotes 
the optimality target. FPTAS is a more restricted class than PTAS, containing 
problems that admit algorithms whose running time is polynomial in both 
input size and the inverse of the desired optimality target ε. Finally, PO (for 
polynomial-time optimization) is the class of optimization problems that 
is analogous to the polynomial-time class P. FPTAS, fully polynomial-time 
approximation scheme; PTAS, polynomial time approximation scheme.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Nature Reviews Physics | Volume 6 | December 2024 | 718–735
 721
Review article
Here, x denotes the decision variables, RQ ∈ nn×  is the cost matrix 
and Nn ∈  is the number of decision variables. Other types of uncon-
strained discrete-optimization problems include higher-order 
polynomial objective functions 32 (polynomial unconstrained binary 
optimization, black-box objective functions 33 and (bounded) integer 
variables). Some problems, such as the maximum-cut (MAXCUT) 
problem, are naturally formulated as a QUBO, and most uncon -
strained discrete-optimization problems can be mapped to QUBOs34–37,  
for example, by replacing integer variables with a suitable 
encoding 38,39 or by converting higher-order polynomial terms to 
additional binary variables and quadratic terms 40,41. In general, QUBO 
is NP-hard42. QUBO is also APX-hard, that is, there cannot exist a PTAS 
for QUBO unless P = NP (ref. 43 ). In principle, Grover search (Box  1) 
or quantum annealing could be used to solve QUBOs; however, these 
algorithms with provable approximation-ratio guarantees are 
expected to require FTQC.
The relationship between solving a QUBO and finding the ground 
state of a Hamiltonian is fundamental to many quantum optimization 
algorithms. The most common translation first substitutes binary 
variables x ∈ {0, 1} with spin variables z = 1 − 2 x, in which z ∈ {−1, +1} is 
known as the Ising model. These spin variables are then replaced with 
Pauli Z matrices, resulting in a diagonal Hamiltonian H ∈ 2× 2nn
R  that 
encodes the objective values of equation ( 1). The ground state of  
H represents the QUBO’s optimal solution34.
The first quantum-computing approach proposed for solving 
unconstrained discrete-optimization problems was the quantum anneal-
ing algorithm2,3,44. Quantum annealing is a quantum adiabatic algorithm 
method that specializes in finding the ground state of a classical Ising 
model by conducting a continuous time evolution (‘annealing’) between 
an initial uniform superposition state and a target Ising Hamiltonian 
(Box 1). The run time of the quantum annealing algorithm is determined 
by the speed of the time evolution. The adiabatic theorem states that if the 
Box 1 | Paradigms in the design of quantum optimization algorithms
 
Multiple approaches lead to exact quantum optimization algorithms, 
such as Grover (adaptive) search225–227 and the quantum adiabatic 
algorithm (QAA). Here, we briefly introduce the core concepts 
deployed as subroutines in various quantum optimization algorithms. 
Many of them are expected to require fault-tolerant quantum 
computing. However, they also serve as theoretical motivation for 
approximation algorithms and heuristics, which may already lead to 
quantum advantages with noisy quantum computers. (More details 
can be found in the Supplementary information).
Grover search. The seminal Grover algorithm for searching an 
unstructured database achieves a quadratic advantage over classical 
search in terms of reducing the number of queries to the database1. 
In exact quantum optimization, this advantage extends to function 
minimization77,225, achieving a quadratic speedup over brute-force 
search in combinatorial optimization problems. Although, in general, 
this is the best that can be hoped for228, the advantage is often less 
pronounced in practical problem classes in which brute-force search 
is not the best classical algorithm. Still, combining Grover Search 
with other quantum or classical algorithms can lead to an overall 
quadratic speedup in specific cases209.
Quantum adiabatic algorithm (QAA). QAA (refs. 2,3,44) is another 
exact optimization algorithm related to homotopy methods in 
numerical mathematics229. It relies on a problem Hamiltonian  
whose ground state represents the solution and a mixing Hamiltonian 
with an easy-to-prepare ground state. QAA gradually evolves the  
state by interpolating between these Hamiltonians, ensuring that  
the final state is close to the solution of the considered problem  
when the evolution is sufficiently slow. Although theoretically 
powerful, the — in general — exponential time required for precise 
adiabatic evolution limits its practicality as an exact optimization 
algorithm. However, QAA may be an effective heuristic in 
non-adiabatic implementations44,168,169,174,230–233.
Quantum phase estimation (QPE). QPE estimates eigenphases 
of unitary operators234,235, enabling the calculation of eigenvalues 
for specific matrices and the solving of Hamiltonian-related 
problems236–238. Shor’s algorithm239 leverages QPE to achieve an 
exponential speedup over the best-known classical algorithms  
for factoring and related problems222,223. QPE is also valuable for  
optimization when a problem is encoded into non-diagonal 
Hamiltonians240,241.
Gibbs sampling. Gibbs sampling generates sample sequences 
from complex probability distributions, for example, by using 
a Markov-chain Monte Carlo algorithm242. Its significance in 
optimization, particularly in classical Markov-chain Monte Carlo 
algorithms, extends to solving problems such as constraint 
satisfaction243. Believed to be at least QMA-hard244,245 (in which 
QMA stands for Quantum Merlin–Arthur, and is a complexity class, 
containing P and NP, of problems that are in general not believed 
to be efficiently solvable by quantum computers), quantum Gibbs 
sampling246 has a crucial role in various optimization algorithms, 
such as discrete and convex optimization. Quantum speedups are 
possible because, under certain conditions, Gibbs states can be 
prepared more efficiently quantumly than classically69,246–252.
Approximation algorithms. In addition to exact algorithms, 
there exist approximation algorithms that guarantee a certain 
approximation ratio. Quantum computing may accelerate known 
classical approximation algorithms via quantum subroutines. For 
instance, semidefinite programming relaxations — as used in the 
famous Goemans-Williamson algorithm for the maximum-cut 
problem64,253 or in more general variants for the quadratic 
unconstrained binary optimization problem254 — may profit from 
quantum semidefinite-programming solvers.
Variational quantum algorithms (VQAs). VQAs are a family of search 
algorithms, originally proposed for quantum chemistry applications255, 
which utilize parameterized quantum states and cost functions 
to iteratively optimize parameters and find good solutions4,256–258. 
Although finding optimal parameters can be NP-hard259,260, VQAs 
provide a heuristic approach with potential quantum advantages.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Nature Reviews Physics | Volume 6 | December 2024 | 718–735 722
Review article
evolution is slow enough, this process will identify optimal solutions of 
the classical combinatorial optimization problem45. The amount of time 
needed to ensure that quantum annealing produces optimal solutions is 
proportional to the minimum gap in the eigenspectrum of the quantum 
Hamiltonian during the evolution process, which is known to shrink 
exponentially with n for many interesting optimization problems46. Given 
that quantum annealing can encode APX-hard computations, this result 
is an expected consequence of computational complexity theory. The 
continuous-time nature of the quantum annealing algorithm makes it 
difficult to analyse using purely mathematical methods. Hence, quantum 
annealing research tends to focus on empirical studies of the behaviour 
of the algorithm in ideal47 and noisy computational settings48,49.
The QAOA 4 is a variational quantum algorithm motivated  
by quantum annealing that is tailored for implementation as low-depth 
quantum circuits. The QAOA uses a particular problem-dependent 
ansatz given by pairs of unitaries in each layer. These unitaries are
Uβ e() =, (2)X
iβH− X
Uγ e() =, (3)P
iγH−
and they are known as mixing and problem unitaries, respectively. 
Here, H denotes the problem Hamiltonian and HX denotes the mixing 
Hamiltonian (see Supplementary information). Both unitaries are 
alternated and repeated p times, with individual parameters βj, γj for 
j = 1, …, p. The p layers are applied to the initial state + n⊗ .
In terms of positive results, there are certain problems and algo-
rithmic settings in which the QAOA can be seen as an approximation 
algorithm with worst-case performance bounds. For example, there 
exists worst-case performance guarantees for QAOA with p = 1, 2, 3 
layers for the MAXCUT problem on three-regular graphs. Specifically, 
for p = 1, a lower bound on the approximation ratio of 0.692 has been 
derived4; also a lower bound of 0.7559 for p  = 2 and (under certain 
assumptions) 0.7924 for p = 3 (ref. 50). Aside from these and a handful 
of other limited settings, performance guarantees for the QAOA are in 
general not known and the QAOA thus remains a heuristic. Considering 
that the energy of the QAOA state for any Ising Hamiltonian can be effi-
ciently and explicitly computed classically for p = 1 (ref. 51), this does 
not immediately imply a guarantee on the approximation ratio. The 
performance of the QAOA for (large-girth) d-regular graphs has been 
analysed numerically, and it can outperform many known relaxations 
based on semidefinite programming (SDP) from p ≥ 11 (refs. 52,53).
Some variants adjust the QAOA to warm-start it from solutions 
obtained by classical algorithms, for example, by leveraging classical 
SDP relaxations and adjusting the QAOA mixers54,55. These approaches 
inherit some of the performance guarantees of the classical algorithms 
used for warm-starting and can greatly outperform the standard QAOA 
in certain instances. Other QAOA variants restart the search on encoun-
tering a barren plateau 56, that is, exponentially decaying gradients: 
the more the barren regions and the higher their proportion in the 
parameter space, the higher the speedup obtained by restarting.
Another alternative to the QAOA is the recursive QAOA (ref. 57), 
which uses a quantum computer to produce a sequence of reduced 
problem instances. Correlations between variables are estimated 
iteratively, and the problem Hamiltonian is reduced by identifying the 
strongest pair-wise correlation and replacing one of the involved varia-
bles by  ±1 times the other variable, in which the sign depends on the sign 
of the correlation. This process is iterated until the reduced problem 
becomes small enough for (provably exact or heuristic) classical solv-
ers, which then yields an approximate solution to the input problem. 
Recent works58–61 have generalized recursive quantum approaches to 
problems beyond MAXCUT and to circuit ansatz beyond the QAOA. 
Another family of near-term compatible approximation algorithms 
for MAXCUT is given by quantum random access optimization62,63.
In terms of negative results, in the large-problem limit, a constant- 
depth QAOA cannot outperform the classical Goemans–Williamson 
approximation 64 for certain instances of MAXCUT on d -regular  
graphs — the depth needs to grow with the size of the problem57. How-
ever, these results are not applicable to alternative approaches such 
as other QAOA variants or the recursive QAOA. Further results on the 
limitations of the QAOA include that QAOA ‘needs to see the whole 
graph’ for a particular QAOA approach to the maximum-independent-
set problem65; similar obstructions to the low-depth QAOA have also 
been shown to apply to k-local generalizations of MAXCUT ( Nk ∈ ) and 
constraint satisfaction problems in the average case66,67.
A heuristic based on time evolution is quantum imaginary time 
evolution (QITE)68,69. Similar to the quantum adiabatic algorithm, QITE 
assumes an initial state ψ ⟩0∣  with a non-zero overlap with the ground 
state of H. Then, it applies the evolution
∣∣ψ e
Z ψ⟩= ⟩, (4)τ
Hτ
τ
−
0
in which τ = it (imaginary time) and ∣∣Z ψe ψ=⟨ ⟩τ
Hτ
0
−2
0  denotes a nor-
malization factor related to the partition function. QITE amplifies the 
amplitudes of the ground state and exponentially suppresses the ampli-
tudes of the other eigenstates. However, because QITE is a non-unitary 
evolution, it is challenging to implement on a quantum computer69, 
and only heuristic variants of QITE exist33,69–72 at present. QITE would, 
however, make it possible to solve QMA-hard problems such as generic 
ground-state search or Gibbs state preparation73.
Alternative cost functions can help to increase the robustness 
against noise or relax the requirements on an ansatz. For example, the 
conditional value at risk74,75 does not average over the objective values 
corresponding to all samples obtained from measuring a quantum 
state, but sorts them and only takes the average over the best α-fraction 
of samples, for a predefined α  ∈ [0, 1]. Another cost function is the 
Gibbs objective function76. As with conditional value at risk, it biases 
the estimate by emphasizing good samples over bad samples through 
applying different weights.
Constrained discrete optimization. Constrained discrete optimiza-
tion is defined by adding constraints of the type g(x) = 0 or g(x) ≤ 0 to 
an unconstrained discrete-optimization problem. For simplicity, we 
consider QUBO and add linear inequality and equality constraints, 
although some of the algorithms are applicable to more complex 
types of constraints. The conversions of higher-order polynomial 
objective functions to quadratic functions and from integer to binary 
variables still apply as already discussed for unconstrained discrete 
optimization. Thus, the considered problems are
xQ x
Ax
Cx
min
s.t. =
≤
(5)
x∈{0,1}
T
n
b
d
for matrices A and C and vectors b and d of appropriate dimensions. 
Unlike for QUBOs, linear objective functions (that is, a diagonal Q) are 
interesting owing to the presence of constraints.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Nature Reviews Physics | Volume 6 | December 2024 | 718–735
 723
Review article
Under mild assumptions for A and C, equation (5) can always be 
converted to QUBO by adding slack variables to convert all inequality 
constraints to equality constraints and then converting equality con-
straints to penalty terms by squaring the right-hand side and adding 
it to the objective function with a large weight36. Some constraints can 
also be encoded into penalty terms more efficiently (see, for exam -
ple, ref. 36); however, although always possible, this might come at a 
substantial cost in terms of additional binary variables and a dramatic 
increase in non-zero terms in the cost matrix in equation (5) — that is, it 
often maps an otherwise sparse matrix Q to a dense one.
We will now discuss strategies to incorporate constraints 
directly. As in unconstrained discrete optimization, Grover search 
can be leveraged to achieve a quadratic speedup over brute-force 
search77. This requires not only an oracle for the objective function 
but also one for each constraint, to mark all feasible solutions. Simi -
larly, a quantum branch and bound algorithm can accelerate classical 
branch-and-bound algorithms78. The algorithm adapts Grover search 
to search branch-and-bound trees, but has the disadvantage that no a 
posteriori bounds on the optimality gap are generated, which often 
enable an early termination of such search schemes.
There are multiple proposals to incorporate constraints in vari-
ational quantum algorithms. The quantum alternating operator 
ansatz79,80 generalizes the QAOA to much wider classes of problems and 
encodings, in particular to problems with hard constraints. Here, more 
general initial states are considered, such as ones from the subspace of 
feasible states for constrained problems. Alternatively, one can also 
directly replace the mixing Hamiltonian HX in equation (2), for example, 
for Hamming-weight constraints by an XY-model Hamiltonian81,82, or 
by a Grover-based83,84 Hamiltonian. However, the resulting mixers are 
more complex and challenging to implement. Another approach is to 
leverage quantum Zeno dynamics to repeatedly project the state back 
to the feasible subspace85. Or iterative or recursive QAOA variants may 
be adapted to enforce constraints as suggested in ref. 60. Here, as for the 
unconstrained case, problems are solved iteratively and usually one vari-
able is removed at a time. Adjusting the selection rules for how variables 
are fixed makes it possible to enforce constraints in certain cases.
Continuous optimization
Convex optimization. A quite general convex optimization problem 
is to minimize a convex function f :→ nRR  over all Rx xx R∈{ ∈: ≤}n
2∥∥  
for a norm upper bound R > 0, given black-box access to evaluate f and 
possibly its derivatives. Gradient descent, for example, works in this 
framework.
A natural question is whether quantum computers offer a speedup 
in query complexity or run time, and the answer is not always positive. 
For example, refs. 86,87 consider black-box access to f  and its (sub)
gradients. In this setting, classical and quantum algorithms have the 
same lower bound for the query complexity in general: no 
n-dependence, but a polynomial scaling in the inverse of the desired 
precision ε. Alternatively, a polynomial n-dependence can be allowed, 
but only a polylogarithmic dependence on ε. Then, under mild assump-
tions, general convex optimization problems can be solved in polyno-
mial time using, for example, the ellipsoid method 88. In this general 
setting, the aim can be to solve a problem of the form cx xKmin s.t. ∈T , 
for some bounded convex set K , to which there are various types of 
oracle access (membership, separation and optimization). Here mild 
quantum speedups (and no-go results) are known89,90.
Often, much more can be said when the convex optimization 
problems have a certain structure. The most notable such classes are 
arguably linear programming and SDP. Here, the objective is to mini-
mize a linear function subject to linear inequalities on non-negative 
vectors (for linear programming) or on positive semidefinite matrices 
(for SDP). SDP can be expressed in the form
CX
AX bi m
maxt r( )
s.t. tr() ≤∀ ∈[ ],
(6)X
ii
0≽
in which the problem is defined by symmetric matrices C A,, …,1
RA ∈m
nn×  and a vector Rb ∈ m. Linear programming is a special case 
of SDP in which each of the input matrices is diagonal. Quantum algo-
rithms for these problems usually trade off an improved dependence 
on the dimension n  and the number of inequalities m  with a worse 
dependence on the precision ε  with which the problem is solved. 
Quantum algorithms for these problems can be categorized based on 
the solution methodology.
The first quantum algorithms for SDP were first-order methods, 
based on the multiplicative weights update (MWU) frame work91.  
In this framework, candidate solutions X  are proportional to 
ρ yA yA=e xp(∑ )/tr(exp(∑ ))i
m
i ii
m
i i=1 =1  for some (sparse) vector Ry ∈ m — 
that is, proportional to Gibbs states, which naturally correspond to 
trace-normalized positive semidefinite matrices and can be efficiently 
prepared on a quantum computer under some conditions. T o imple-
ment the MWU framework, it is also necessary to compute trace inner 
products tr(Aρ) between such Gibbs states ρ and a matrix A (which is 
either one of the Ai’s or C) and essentially solve a search problem based 
on these values.
All of these steps can be performed on a quantum computer, with 
various levels of efficiency. The run time of quantum MWU methods 
depends on several parameters: the dimension n, the number of con-
straints m and the desired (additive) error ε in the objective function 
and on two instance-specific parameters, typically denoted by R, and r, 
that are related to the diameter of the feasible region for the primal 
( XRtr( )≤ ) and dual problems (∥y∥1 ≤ r) and bound the so-called width 
of the oracle. Initial results had a run time of mn s~ (p oly( ))
Rr
ε
2O , in 
which s is the row sparsity of the input matrices and O~  ignores poly-
logarithmic factors in all variables 92,93. Later work94–96 has improved 
this to mn s~ (( +) poly() )
Rr
ε
2O .
In comparison with classical algorithms, the best-known general 
SDP solvers, which approximate the optimal value to additive error 
ε, scale as mm nm ns~ (( ++ ))ω2O , in which ω ∈[ 2, 2.373) is the unknown 
optimal matrix exponent for multiplication 97. Thus, quantum SDP 
solvers seem to be beneficial in the regimes where n and m are large; 
however, the input models of the classical and quantum algorithms 
are not necessarily equivalent so it is not entirely fair to compare these 
results. Furthermore, the parameters r,  R and ε usually appear 
together as one ‘scale-invariant’ parameter γ  = Rr/ε, which can scale 
poorly in terms of n and m (ref. 93), especially when r  and R scale lin-
early or superlinearly with n (see Supplementary information for more 
details). Notable exceptions are applications to shadow tomography, 
quantum state discrimination and E-optimal design (optimal design 
in which the smallest eigenvalue of the information matrix is  
maximized)94,95. First-order methods other than MWU could also be 
studied (see, for example, ref. 98 ), but the speedup there is poorly 
understood.
Interior point methods (IPMs) are popular second-order methods 
to solve structured convex optimization problems both from a theo-
retical and from a practical perspective. IPMs start from a point lying 

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Nature Reviews Physics | Volume 6 | December 2024 | 718–735 724
Review article
in the interior of a convex feasible set R⊂ nX  and use Newton’s method 
to solve a sequence of barrier problems:
ηc xf xmin⋅ ⟨, ⟩+ () , (7)x∈ nR
in which 〈 ⋅ , ⋅ 〉 is an inner product on R η,≥ 0n  and ↦ RXf :i nt ()  is a 
barrier function encoding the constraints defining X. That is, f(x) → ∞ 
as x approaches the boundary of X, and thus the only ‘constraint’ present 
in equation (7) is that f is only defined on the interior points of X. Each 
step requires solving a linear system. It is therefore natural to ask 
whether quantum linear-system solvers99–101, followed by quantum 
state tomography, can be used to speedup such a task. However, mul-
tiple issues emerge. The use of state tomography introduces inexactness 
in the search direction and a 1/ε dependence in the run time, in which 
ε is the tomographic precision102. Furthermore, using the quantum 
linear-systems algorithm introduces a run time dependence on the 
condition number of the Newton linear system, which, unfortunately, 
goes to ∞ as optimality is approached — although these two issues can 
be partly dealt with by IPMs that allow inexact search directions103 and 
by iterative refinement techniques104,105. Overall, assuming access to 
quantum random access memory (QRAM), quantum IPMs achieve 
favourable dependence on the size of the problem (m and n) for linear 
and semidefinite optimization compared with classical algorithms, but 
the remaining dependence on some numerical parameters (such as a 
condition number bound for Newton systems) makes it unclear whether 
an overall speedup is achieved. Although concrete proposals to build 
QRAM exist106,107, a scalable fault-tolerant implementation is yet to be 
found108–110, making this at best a long-term prospect.
Only very recently, a quantum speedup for IPMs was achieved 
without introducing a dependence on a condition number 111. Under 
some mild assumptions and access to QRAM, this IPM achieves a quan-
tum speedup for linear programmes in which the number of linear 
inequalities m is much larger than the number of variables n . In par-
ticular, the best classical solver achieves a scaling of mn n(+ )2.5̃O 112, 
whereas the quantum analogue scales as mn ε⋅p oly( ,l og(1/) ).
Quantum algorithms for convex optimization can also be designed 
by providing a Schrödinger equation whose trajectory follows a descent 
path (as in gradient descent) and simulating the corresponding dynami-
cal system. This approach was pioneered in ref. 113, leading to a quan-
tum algorithm with convergence guarantees on convex and non-convex 
problems, although the latter may require exponential time in general. 
The approach has been extended114 to follow the central path for linear 
programming, giving an alternative approach to IPMs with better 
running time in most parameters, even without QRAM.
Non-convex optimization. In general, non-convex optimization can 
be defined as:
fxmin( ). (8)x∈ nR
Many variants are undecidable115, especially in the cases of periodic 
functions f, or sufficiently non-smooth functions, but kth order critical 
points of non-convex functions can be studied.
There are clear limits to the speedup in non-convex optimization116, 
echoing the situation in convex optimization86. In particular, when the 
first Nk ∈  partial derivatives of f are available via an oracle or there is 
access to stochastic gradients, and no further assumptions are made, 
classical lower bounds apply to quantum algorithms too. Hence, suit-
able special cases are sought, such as by considering the numbers of 
local minima, local behaviour of the functions around those minima 
and behaviour of the trajectories connecting nearby local minima (the 
‘barriers’).
It has also been shown 117 that there are query upper bounds on 
finding critical points with quantum algorithms for stochastic gradient 
descent. With access to a probability-weighted superposition over the 
bounded-variance stochastic gradient, the algorithm requires O nε() −3  
queries, which is only better than the classical algorithm O(ε−4) when 
the dimension is lower than ε −2. This can be improved with access to 
mean-squared smooth stochastic gradients, from O(ε−3) to O nε() −5/2 . 
The run time for all of these algorithms both classically and quantumly 
will, in most cases, be polynomial in n.
In high-dimensional situations, the availability of the quantum 
linear-systems algorithm and of quantum linear-algebra methods 
motivates the direct quantum implementation of gradient descent 
over O(polylog(n)) qubits118,119 to provide descriptions of stationary 
points of non-convex functions. With a non-convex differentiable 
function fx() :→ nRR  and an initial point Rx ∈ n0 , consider the gradient 
descent update x → x − η ∇ f(x) with η > 0. For T ∈ N, the task is to output 
a quantum state proportional to x T, in which the update is applied  
T times starting from x0. Although the algorithm may admit a polylog(n) 
complexity, amplifying the 0  state at the end of the gradient proce-
dure can cost O(2T) and an efficient circuit may be constructed only  
for special cases 118,120 or could be approximated via pre-training a 
parameterized quantum circuit.
Mixed-integer programming
Combining discrete decision variables and continuous decision vari-
ables, mixed-integer programmes are non-convex and at least as hard 
as the discrete-optimization and continuous-optimization problems 
they subsume.
There are several potential algorithms to approach mixed-integer 
programming (MIP) using a quantum computer. ‘Branch-and-
bound-and-cut’ is the main workhorse in classical MIP. One possibility 
for a hybrid implementation is that discrete decisions are handled by 
branching and generation of cuts implemented classically, whereas 
the continuous, possibly convex relaxations could be solved on the 
quantum computer. Considering the progress in quantum algorithms 
for convex optimization, this approach seems plausible, albeit distant. 
More ambitiously, the branching decisions could be determined quan-
tumly as well, which would yield an additional quadratic speedup78,121–123 
over the speedup of quantum algorithms for convex optimization, 
while increasing the requirements on the numbers of qubits and fault 
tolerance substantially. Some earlier works78,121 consider the speedup 
in the case of locating all optima (measured against the classical cost of 
finding all optima), whereas others122,123 consider the speedup of obtain-
ing one optimum (out of possibly multiple ones), measured against the 
classical cost of finding one optimum. It has recently been suggested124 
that super-quadratic speedups might be possible in some cases.
Similarly, decomposition algorithms (such as splitting, or the 
alternating direction method of multipliers) for MIP often solve 
the QUBO subproblem using a quantum computer 125,126, while solv -
ing the continuous subproblem classically. Under some restrictive 
conditions126, such an iterative approach can be shown to be globally 
convergent. A similar approach has been tested 127 in the context of 
Benders decomposition.
Alternatively, MIP can be reformulated to an unconstrained 
optimization problem. A decomposition has been explored128,129 that 
minimizes values of the slack variables used to convert inequality 

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Nature Reviews Physics | Volume 6 | December 2024 | 718–735
 725
Review article
constraints to equality constraints, with a Lagrangian relaxation of 
the resulting equality-constrained continuous-valued problem. Such 
Lagrangian methods are well understood130,131, but global-convergence 
results are limited by very restrictive conditions, in general, or require 
some form of backtracking132.
MIP could also be reformulated to high-dimensional linear pro-
gramming using techniques that date back to the work of Dantzig and 
Wolfe in the 1960s (ref. 133). Similarly, using moment or sum-of-squares 
techniques134,135, MIP can be reformulated to infinite-dimensional linear 
programming, with an SDP relaxation in a dimension much higher than 
n + d and sometimes136 exponential in n + d. If quantum algorithms for SDP 
could make it possible to solve such instances with run time independ-
ent of the dimension, this might be an interesting avenue for quantum 
algorithms for MIP. Finally, a mathematically elegant reformulation of an 
MIP problem results in a linear programme over the dual of the cone of 
copositive matrices137. For a fixed n, these matrices form a convex cone138, 
but even the test of membership in this cone is NP-hard139. A possible 
way to exploit this reformulation in the context of a hybrid solver140 is to 
use a quantum computer to solve the difficult cut generation problem, 
whereas the classical computer solves a convex problem.
Dynamic programming
Dynamic programming is a very generic mathematical optimization 
method that breaks down large optimization problems into smaller 
ones and combines results for the overall problem in a recursive fashion. 
A dynamic programming algorithm consists of repeatedly optimizing 
the Bellman equation:
Vx Tx aV x() =m in (, )+ () , (9)a a
in which a are the actions that are available in the state x and xa = F(x, a) 
is the state reached by applying a in the state x. The entries V(x) can be 
arranged into a dynamic programming table. A dynamic programming 
algorithm then computes all the entries V(x) in this table. The order in 
which the entries are computed is chosen so that, whenever the algo-
rithm has to compute V(x), all V(xa) have already been computed and 
V(x) can be computed from equation (9). The complexity of a dynamic 
programming algorithm is O(Sm), in which S is the number of possible 
states x for which we have to optimize the Bellman equation and m is the 
maximum number of actions in one state. For many problems, S increases 
exponentially with the size (called ‘the curse of dimensionality’), often 
implying an exponential run time for dynamic programming.
Quantum speedups are known for a substantial number of clas -
sical dynamic-programming algorithms, utilizing a combination of 
classical dynamic programming and Grover’s search. For example, 
the quantum algorithm for the TSP in ref. 141 first uses dynamic pro-
gramming to compute the shortest paths through sets of cities that 
contain up to 24% of all cities and then uses Grover’s search to find 
the shortest combination of those paths that visits all of the cities and 
returns to the starting point. Similar ideas can be applied to other 
problems, in which the classical algorithm uses an exponentially large 
dynamic-programming table indexed by subsets of an n-element 
set. Examples include graph colouring 142, the minimum Steiner tree 
problem143,144, tree width145 and single-machine scheduling146. The prob-
lems amenable to this approach are typically vertex-ordering problems 
(in which the task is to find the optimal ordering of vertices in a graph, 
as in the TSP) or set-partitioning problems (in which the task is to find 
the optimal partition of a set, as in set cover or graph colouring). Such 
problems lead to a dynamic programming table in the form of a Boolean 
hypercube (2n entries indexed by x ∈ {0, 1}n), which can often be handled 
by computing part of the table and then using Grover’s search to find the 
best solution, leading to an overall — usually subquadratic — speedup.
A generic dynamic programming problem can be reformulated 
with the dynamic programming table in the form of hypercube, with 
the result that, in the generic case, the quantum speedup can be at 
most quadratic141. It is an open problem whether quantum speedups 
can be obtained for algorithms with a dynamic programming table of 
a different structure.
Optimal control
Optimization with differential equations as constraints is a subject of 
optimal control theory. A standard finite-horizon optimal control 
problem takes the following form: find a control function u with values 
in a given set U solving
U
∫
̇
ℓx tu tt hx T
xf xu xt tT
min( () ,( ))d +( () )
s.t. =( ,) ,( )∈ ,∈ [0,) ,
(10)ut
T
n
() ∈ 0
R
for some nice functions ℓ ,  f  and h (see, for example, ref. 147 ).  
A globally optimal solution of this problem, the so-called feedback 
optimal-control policy u*(x, t), can be found by introducing a value 
function:




Vz tℓ xs us sh xT xf xu xt z(, )= min( () ,( ))d +( ( )), =( ,) ,( )= .( 11)
ut t
T
() ∈U
∫ ̇
Generalizing classical dynamic programming ideas, it can be 
demonstrated that V solves the following Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman 
(HJB) equation backwards in time:
U
V
t ℓx uf xu Vx t∂
∂ +m in{( ,) +( ,) ∇( ,) }= 0, (12)
u x∈
⊤
subject to the terminal condition V(x, T) = h(x), for all Rx ∈ n. Given the 
solution of equation (12), the optimal-control policy in the feedback 
form is computed as follows:
ut xℓ xu fx uV xt*(, )= argmin{( ,) +( ,) ∇( ,) }. (13)
u x∈U
⊤
The key problem associated with the HJB equation, continuous or 
discrete, is the ‘curse of dimensionality’ . Solving equation (12) by con-
ventional methods of numerical analysis quickly becomes intractable 
even in rather modest dimensions (for example, if x t() ∈ nR  for n ≥ 10). 
In other words, a direct approach to solving the HJB equation has slim 
chances of succeeding classically.
In addition to optimal control, the HJB equation has many appli-
cations: from nonlinear filtering or state estimation for differential 
equations148 to discrete optimization — the most relevant applica -
tion in the context of this Review. For instance, the HJB equation for 
discrete-time dynamics can be seen as the famous Bellman equation 
of dynamic programming, which in turn connects HJB equations with 
reinforcement learning, a family of algorithms in which an agent aims 
to learn optimal decisions in unknown environments through the 
experience of taking actions and observing the rewards gained (see 
the Supplementary information for details).
Quantum approaches can be classified based on whether the 
learning agent has a standard classical access to the environment or 

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Nature Reviews Physics | Volume 6 | December 2024 | 718–735 726
Review article
whether the interaction itself is quantum. In the latter case, numerous 
types of quantum oracular access to the task environment have been 
explored: for example, where coherent access to a unitary encoding 
the transition function is possible149, or where the environment closely 
mimics classical reinforcement-learning settings, allows only actions 
as inputs and has memory 150. The main conceptual limitations are  
the requirement to coherently access the task environment, which 
might only be possible in very restricted or constructed cases. In 
some works, the focus was also on identifying the exact solutions, 
for which, in real-world problems, the search spaces are simply too 
large. The up-side of the aforementioned results is that the speedups 
concern the number of interactions with the environment and are not 
contingent on any assumptions in complexity theory.
It has been shown 151 that quadratic speedups in policy optimi -
zation are possible as long as the policies satisfy certain regularity  
conditions — which are, for example, satisfied for policies defined by 
parameterized quantum circuits. The lower bounds for this problem 
have been established for a more general setting 152 and they show 
that these quadratic improvements cannot be improved further. 
However, if the environments are not arbitrary but special, more sub-
stantial improvements are possible, including provable exponential 
speedups153. The contrived nature of these environments makes these 
results unlikely to have implications in practice.
When the access to the task environment is restricted to be clas-
sical, provable speedups are possible too. For example, it has been 
proved154,155 that there exists task environments with a super-polynomial 
advantage for quantum reinforcement-learning algorithms (with 
respect to finding optimal policies and optimal q -functions), unless 
the discrete logarithm problem has an efficient classical solution.
Benchmarks
Benchmarking can provide valuable insights into the practical per -
formance of optimization algorithms in situations in which purely 
analytical methods are insufficient. In fact, it can even be misleading 
to rely only on analytically assessed performance because theoretical 
complexity analysis typically pertains to general problem classes and 
considers mostly asymptotic scaling behaviour or worst-case scenarios. 
The theoretical worst-case bounds often fail to describe the difficul-
ties of solving real-world applications that focus on a specific problem 
instance of practical use, nor do they faithfully describe how well practi-
cally relevant problems can be solved for fixed size and data. Meaningful 
and systematic benchmarks are therefore essential to demonstrate 
practical usefulness of optimization algorithms. However, conduct-
ing such benchmarking with well-defined assumptions, considering 
implementation, data and metrics, is a challenging task.
Here, we will highlight best practices for benchmarking and pro-
vide a set of interesting problems that enable a thorough, robust, 
fair and reproducible framework for comprehensive comparisons of 
different classical and quantum approaches. We first give an overview 
of related work, then present benchmark design choices such as the 
metrics to be evaluated and finally elaborate on various optimization 
problems, which are difficult for state-of-the-art solvers and might 
provide interesting benchmarking problems for quantum methods.
Related work
General introductions to computational benchmarking can be found 
in refs. 156–161. Several important collections of classical optimization 
benchmarks have originated from publicly hosted ‘benchmarking chal-
lenges’ or competitions. The aim of these challenges is to understand 
and improve the practical performance of algorithms for various opti-
mization problems, particularly those that are theoretically hard. The 
challenges aid in evaluating realistic algorithm performance condi-
tioned on the resources available at the time of the competition. Some 
of the most relevant, regularly held optimization challenges, tackling 
problems using classical digital computers, are the Discrete Math -
ematics and Theoretical Computer Science (DIMACS) implementation 
challenges  (http://dimacs.rutgers.edu/programs/challenge/) and the 
Satisfiability competition162.
Optimization competitions and libraries that are compatible with 
(near-term) quantum computers have not yet been widely established, 
but would enable streamlined benchmarking of quantum optimi -
zation methods. Previous work has focused on application-centric 
quantum-hardware benchmarking frameworks that employ optimiza-
tion problems as an exemplary use-case163–166. We give an overview of 
selected experimental quantum optimization results run on gate-based 
quantum computers with more than 16 qubits in the Supplementary 
information — these results represent excellent starting points for 
comprehensive quantum optimization benchmarks. Further bench-
marks that investigate different properties of quantum annealing 
methods — some including comparisons to classical algorithms — for 
optimization problems can be found in refs. 166 –175. A comparison 
of Ising machines that checks success probabilities for finding the 
ground state and the corresponding time-to-solution is presented in 
ref. 176. Various QUBO solvers are compared in ref. 177 with respect to 
the solution quality and time-to-solution, which is a good baseline for 
an optimization benchmark.
None of these works offers holistic optimization benchmarking 
frameworks, but they do provide useful insights that can help to define 
reproducible, representative and fair benchmark libraries, which will 
facilitate identifying the advantages and disadvantages of various 
(quantum) solvers.
Design
T o ensure reproducibility as well as replicability of a benchmark, 
it is important to clearly define the specifics of model selection, 
pre-processing, computational platform, target metrics and selected 
algorithm (provably exact, heuristic and so on) including suitable 
hyperparameters. Relevant algorithmic paradigms are given in Box 1, 
and quantum algorithms for optimization problem classes have already 
been presented. We now discuss the remaining levels of design choices.
Model independence. T o find the optimal (or at least a sufficiently 
good) solution of a concrete problem, the optimization problem must 
be formulated in terms of a rigorous mathematical model, such as MIP 
or QUBO, before selecting a particular algorithm or computational plat-
form. The model choice is usually not unique and can strongly affect 
the performance of algorithms: certain models and algorithms are bet-
ter suited for certain problems than others. Hence, to find the overall 
best solution to a given problem, a model-independent benchmark 
must be defined, allowing all possibilities to model a certain problem. 
Alternatively, the aim might be to find the best algorithm or hardware 
platform to solve a problem given a specific model formulation, which 
results in a model-dependent benchmark.
Model-independent benchmarks without limitations on admissi-
ble solution strategies are crucial to demonstrate quantum advantage 
for optimization. Quantum advantage may stem from novel prob -
lem formulations that could not be captured on a model-dependent 
level. Furthermore, quantum hardware is evolving quickly, and 

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Nature Reviews Physics | Volume 6 | December 2024 | 718–735
 727
Review article
model-independent benchmarks are better suited for comparability 
and compatibility between different generations of hardware, enabling 
leverage of new features that might not have been available in earlier 
generations, such as dynamic quantum circuits 178. We expect these 
benchmarks to eventually show how quantum optimization algorithms 
are approaching, meeting and exceeding the capabilities of classical 
techniques for solving particular problem instances.
In the remainder of this section, we focus on the model-  
independent setting. However, we would like to highlight the impor-
tance of model-dependent benchmarks, for example, in comparing 
hardware capabilities of different gate-based quantum computers by 
solving a given QUBO model and in tracking progress in hardware and 
algorithmic development.
Pre-processing. The term ‘pre-processing’ or ‘pre-solving’ refers to a 
set of methods that are applied to a problem instance or data before the 
actual optimization algorithm is executed. The goal of pre-processing 
is to modify the problem in such a way that it enables the optimiza -
tion algorithm to work more efficiently. Pre-processing can have a 
substantial impact on benchmarking results and should be chosen 
and reported on with care.
How pre-processing is implemented in practice depends on the 
data, the optimization algorithm and its mathematical formulation 
and on the computational platform. In fact, it is not uncommon for 
many problems — such as the Euclidean TSP, or Steiner tree problems in  
graphs — that pre-processing is able to remove 95% of the variables 
and, hence, substantially reduce the problem size and resource 
requirements179,180. Considering the example of QUBO, various reduc-
tion techniques to eliminate optimization variables have been sug -
gested in the literature and are reviewed in ref. 180 . For example, 
analytic reduction rules181 make it possible to conditionally fix certain 
optimization variables, while guaranteeing that at least one optimal 
solution will remain in the search space. In addition to the number of 
optimization variables, their degree of correlation (which is deter -
mined by the sparsity of the QUBO matrix) is also of interest. In the case 
that certain groups of decision variables are not correlated, QUBOs 
can be decomposed trivially into smaller sub-QUBOs to be solved 
independently.
More generally, decomposition approaches can be an option to 
break large problems into smaller subproblems. Decomposition is well 
established in classical optimization but can also help quantum opti-
mization — for example, in fitting a large problem on a smaller quan-
tum computer. However, decomposition often introduces a trade-off 
between the size and number of subproblems and the overall resulting 
solution quality. Thus, achieving a quantum advantage in the subprob-
lems is necessary but not sufficient for achieving a quantum advantage 
for the global problem. But as long as the advantage can be carried 
over, decomposition can be a key tool towards quantum advantage. 
The development of quantum-specific decomposition schemes might 
further help achieve this goal.
Platforms. Different platforms have different strengths and suffer 
from different bottlenecks, and hence some may be better suited 
for certain optimization problems or modelling tasks than others. 
Furthermore, depending on the platform, the optimization models 
and applicable algorithms do vary, resulting in better or worse perfor-
mance for a given problem. Understanding the intrinsic properties of 
a hardware platform is crucial to put the results of a benchmark into 
perspective and to define benchmarks that allow for fair comparison 
between systems that can function very differently — a non-trivial 
task. Cross-platform benchmarking can be used to better understand 
the advantages and disadvantages of different platforms for different 
optimization problems.
We will now elaborate on the various hardware types that are rel-
evant for optimization problems — that is, classical versus quantum, 
and analog versus digital. An illustration of the platform ecosystem is 
shown in Fig. 2.
Classical digital systems are the workhorse of today’s computer 
technology. The basic units of information are the binary values 0 
and 1, and information is processed by compositions of logical opera-
tions such as AND and NOT gates, which can be expressed in a circuit 
model. Digital classical computational models often rely on a combina-
tion of central processing units (CPUs), which excel at sequential and 
general data-processing tasks, and graphical processing units (GPUs), 
which specialize in parallel processing tasks.
There are several other types of processors and specialized 
hardware accelerators designed for specific tasks and applica -
tions, for example, tensor processing units for deep learning and 
field-programmable gate arrays for signal processing and embed -
ded systems, to name just two. The combination of CPU, GPU and 
special-purpose processors forms the foundation for classical 
high-performance computation in a wide range of applications. Clas-
sical digital hardware devices are incorporated in a wide range of com-
puting platforms, including desktop computers, computing clusters, 
cloud services, mobile phones and many more. All of these platforms 
can be used to solve optimization problems.
Special-purpose systems for optimization also exist, devel -
oped to simulate quantum phenomena such as quantum anneal-
ing. Well-known examples of this type of technology are the Fujitsu 
Digital Annealer 182,183, which is based on a hardware-accelerated 
Classical
digital
Quantum
digital
Quantum
analog
Universal
quantum
computing
Quantum computing
Digital computingAnalog computing
Hybrid
computing
Specialized
hardware
accelerators
Digital
simulation
Analog
simulation
Quantum
annealing
Classical
high-performance
computing
Classical computing
Classical
analog
Fig. 2 | The optimization-platform ecosystem. Various hardware types are 
relevant for solving optimization problems — digital or analog, classical or 
quantum, and even hybrid computing schemes — some better suited to certain 
optimization problems than others. In our discussion of benchmarking, we focus 
on digital classical computing and on digital and analog quantum computing.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Nature Reviews Physics | Volume 6 | December 2024 | 718–735 728
Review article
Markov-chain Monte Carlo approach; the Hitachi CMOS Anneal -
ing Machine 184, whose in-memory computing architecture rep -
resents an Ising model with local interactions; and the T oshiba 
Simulated Bifurcation Machine 185,186, which does not approximate 
an annealing process but instead implements a highly parallelizable 
approximation of Ising dynamics using classical hardware (GPU and 
field-programmable gate arrays), enabling computation of heuristic 
solutions to problems with up to millions of variables in a time frame 
of seconds.
In digital quantum computing187, the basic units of information are 
qubits instead of bits. The information processing consists of consecu-
tive quantum gate operations such as CNOT gates and single-qubit 
rotation gates, which, together, form a quantum circuit, similar to a 
classical logical circuit. Important bottlenecks of existing digital quan-
tum computers are limited coherence times, which result in limited 
circuit depths, limited qubit numbers and limited qubit connectivity. 
There are various ways to quantify the performance of a digital quan-
tum computer. An overview of best practices for executing quantum 
optimization algorithms on noisy digital quantum hardware is given 
in the Supplementary information.
Analog quantum computing hardware is a more specialized kind 
of quantum computer that performs continuous time evolution of the 
Schrödinger equation188. These types of computers are a natural fit for 
quantum simulation applications 188–196. Additionally, the quantum 
annealing algorithm (discussed earlier) provides a way for these com-
puters to be used for unconstrained optimization tasks as well2,3,167,197,198. 
Thus far, analog quantum computers have been developed for solving 
optimization problems in the format of Ising models 199 and special 
cases of the maximum independent set 200. In contrast with digital 
quantum computing, which is very flexible, analog quantum comput-
ing focuses on a more limited scope of optimization tasks, compatible 
with analog hardware.
Metrics. Owing to the technological differences between classical 
and quantum systems, it is crucial to select metrics that enable a fair 
comparison. The main metric categories are resource cost and solution 
quality.
The resource cost includes any quantum or classical computa -
tional resources that are employed to solve an optimization problem, 
including any potential pre-processing or post-processing steps and 
resources that are used in parallel. Classical computing resources 
are typically measured with respect to factors such as used memory, 
required memory bandwidth and CPU specifications, including clock 
speed and the number of cores. Quantum computational resources can 
be measured in terms of the number of circuits, the number of executed 
gates per circuit, the number of qubits and shots per circuit execution 
and the quality of the qubits. Of course, the resource cost should also 
consider resources that are required for problem-dependent calibra-
tions and error mitigation or, if applicable, correction. The number of 
qubits in a quantum programme strongly depends on the mapping 
of problem variables to qubits; hence, algorithmic improvements 
in mapping schemes can lead to a reduction in qubit requirements. 
Resource-cost reporting must also include the run time, that is, the 
duration of usage of quantum or classical computational resources.
Unfortunately, several of these resource costs are difficult to 
compare over different platforms and algorithms. Although, ideally, 
it would be good to check absolute metrics such as the total energy 
usage required to get a solution, that kind of information is usually 
difficult to access for the end-user. The overall run time is one of the 
most important metrics for providing an objectively fair comparison 
of different computational platforms — but this still strongly depends 
on the benchmarking setting (such as what pre-processing is used), and 
it is hence of utmost importance to clearly define what determines a 
faster algorithm. The effective end-to-end run time of an algorithm 
consists of the time used for pre-processing, transpilation, embed -
ding, compilation, execution and post-processing. For existing quan-
tum computing software, transpilation, embedding and compilation 
times contribute substantially. However, these are areas of active  
research and development and we expect the times to be reduced in 
the near future.
The solution quality strongly relies on the nature of the problem. 
First, a solution must be compatible with the problem constraints — 
that is, it must be feasible, which can be easily checked. Ultimately, 
the hope is to find the optimal solution or at least a solution that is ε,  
which is close to the optimal solution, but note that the evaluation of 
optimality might be resource-intensive or even intractable. Given a 
feasible solution, the optimality gap can be identified via bounds given 
by continuous relaxations201 or dual representations202. Furthermore, 
in certain applications, a set of diverse solutions, of comparable (good) 
quality, might be of interest: for instance, in the case that a complex 
real-world optimization problem has to be represented by a simplified 
model. Given a diverse set of solutions, a decision-maker may pick the 
one that best matches (possibly informal) constraints and preferences 
that could not be directly added to the optimization problem. Other 
examples are multi-objective optimization (Supplementary informa-
tion) and accelerating branching strategies in MIP solvers. Solution 
diversity is difficult to quantify in general as its utility depends mostly 
on the context.
T o provide a holistic quantum optimization benchmark, metrics 
that describe algorithm and solution properties should be measured. 
Depending on the problem, model, algorithm and execution plat -
form, the respective metrics should be chosen carefully and reported 
transparently.
Problems
We will now present a set of model-independent problems that show 
promise for establishing standardized quantum optimization bench-
marks. The problem instances chosen may be crafted, random or 
real-world problems.
Crafted instances, designed to represent challenging problems, 
are most likely the best way to find problem instances that are hard to 
solve by classical methods. However, there is a risk that there is also a 
classical method (or one could be developed) that takes advantage of 
the special problem structure or that the instances are of no practical 
value. Random instances are different because they lack structure. 
Depending on the problem, this can make them particularly easy or 
very difficult to solve, and how meaningful these instances are can 
be debated. Real-world instances correspond in many practically rel-
evant cases to MIPs that can be solved up to sufficient accuracy using 
existing solvers. However, instances that are relevant and difficult to 
solve with existing methods are hard to find in a setting that fits the 
dimensionality and density limitations of current quantum hardware. 
In fact, these problems are generally hard to find because open prob-
lems of industrial relevance are rarely published or may be ill-defined. 
This highlights a common selection bias: we rarely model practically 
relevant problems in a way we know we cannot solve.
The problems chosen should be sufficiently hard for state-of-
the-art classical solvers to leave a margin for quantum methods, but 

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Nature Reviews Physics | Volume 6 | December 2024 | 718–735
 729
Review article
should also be within an intermediate size range in which current or 
near-term quantum technologies can be effectively deployed. Ideal 
problem instances are those for which existing methods are unable 
to provide provably optimal or feasible solutions. Furthermore, it is 
crucial that the problem can be formulated as a quantum-compatible 
model, that is, with sufficiently few variables and qubits, limited con-
nection density, relatively small coefficients and so on. In other words, 
a sweet spot for current quantum systems is sought, which enables the 
investigation of quantum advantage compared with suitably chosen 
digital algorithms. It can also be valuable for tracking the progress in 
algorithmic and hardware development to identify a family of problems 
that are similar in their nature but differ in their difficulty.
The following are binary problems that are promising candidates 
for quantum optimization benchmarking problems (additional details 
can be found in the Supplementary information). These problems 
are random or crafted instances and relate to only a few practical 
applications. Nevertheless, they offer a good testbed for algorithm 
development and progress tracking.
Maximum independent set. This is a classic NPO-hard problem and 
there are known instances (https://oeis.org/A265032/a265032.html) 
that are hard to solve to proven optimality using existing methods, 
starting at problem sizes of several hundred variables. The allure of this 
problem class for quantum optimization benchmarking is that it is well 
suited for translation into relatively sparse QUBOs203–206.
Knapsack or market share. The goal of a (multidimensional) knapsack 
problem (or market share) is to find the maximal set of items that can be 
added according to a set of given weights, such that the resulting sum 
is lower or equal to a given knapsack constraint. For carefully chosen 
coefficients, these problems can be difficult to solve using classical 
methods to proven optimality15,207,208. We believe that this problem class 
is a good candidate for quantum optimization benchmarking because 
there is clear evidence that it is already challenging for classical digital 
systems to find (approximate) solutions — even for small system sizes 
in the multidimensional case.
Low autocorrelation binary sequences. This is a difficult binary non-
linear optimization problem13, with the goal of finding, using binary 
variables, a sequence S of length k that minimizes a given energy func-
tion. There is only one particular instance per size N; hence, the frontier 
of what is possible is always well defined. Given the spin-like binary 
variables, it might be possible to find a model formulation that could 
provide a natural fit for a quantum platform, although the quartic 
objective function creates challenges in doing so209.
Quadratic assignment problem.  This problem210 has remained one 
of the great challenges in combinatorial optimization. It is still consid-
ered a computationally nontrivial task to solve to optimality, even for 
modestly sized problems (n  ≈ 30 facilities and locations). Modelling 
this problem as a QUBO results in a dense formulation with n 2 vari-
ables. The long and unsuccessful search for improvements in classi-
cal methods indicates that there might be room here for quantum 
advantage.
Sports timetabling problems. These problems describe scheduling 
problems for sports leagues or tournaments and are generated in a way 
that ensures at least one feasible solution exists per instance211. Interest-
ingly, for several medium-sized instances, no known (and investigated) 
method has been able to find even a single feasible solution212,213. What 
is particularly interesting about these problems is that instances can 
be generated at variable size and difficulty to track progress, but it is 
known that sufficiently large problems are difficult for state-of-the-art 
methods.
Spin glasses. The mapping of a spin-glass problem onto a QUBO is 
trivial and leads to relatively sparse models. Classical solvers often per-
form well on spin glasses defined on regular lattices; however, the pos-
sibility of digital quantum optimizers having better performance still 
exists — possibly on non-regular lattice structures214. Hence, spin-glass 
problems are interesting candidates for quantum benchmarks, espe-
cially in a cross-platform setting. Moreover, spin-glass problems have 
properties that make them provably average-case hard for various 
families of classical algorithms21. It is an open question whether quan-
tum algorithms can do better in these average-case settings, and thus, 
superpolynomial speedups for spin-glass problems are still possible.
Classical methods that can be used to approach all of these 
problems include branch-and-cut-based integer (linear, nonlinear 
or semi-definite) programming 215, pseudo-Boolean optimization 216, 
satisfiability solving 162,217, constraint programming 218 and several 
other general techniques219 as well as a multitude of specific heuristic 
approaches.
The path towards quantum advantage
Classical algorithms can be developed both theoretically and empiri-
cally. Algorithms that work well empirically may only later be fully 
understood theoretically. By contrast, quantum algorithms are pri-
marily developed theoretically owing to limited hardware availability. 
However, this is changing. The rise of gate-based quantum computers 
with hundreds of qubits enables complex circuits beyond exact classi-
cal simulability220,221. T o develop and improve quantum optimization 
algorithms, in addition to continued technological progress, it is crucial 
to combine theoretical and empirical research — similar to classical 
algorithms. In this context, we believe that there are three key directions 
to advance on the path towards quantum advantage.
First, real-world optimization problems should be identified that 
are promising candidates to demonstrate quantum advantage. This is 
challenging owing to the many open questions about the future perfor-
mance of quantum optimization algorithms, their heuristic nature and 
the overhead introduced by quantum error correction. Additionally, 
these problems must be truly challenging for classical solvers; if clas-
sical solvers are sufficient, there is no margin for quantum advantage. 
A formal understanding of the actual goal of application is required. 
This may sound trivial, but practical challenges can arise when trying 
to formally define objective functions, constraints or preferences in 
a rigorous mathematical way, or when trying to get the required data.
Furthermore, as mentioned earlier, problems are typically mod-
elled to be solvable, often involving simplifications such as lineariza-
tion. Although the impact of these simplifications can be negligible 
in some cases, it might be notable in terms of practical impact or solv-
ability in others. Challenging and relevant problems must be rigor -
ously defined, ideally in a model-independent way, and necessary data 
should be available to construct instances using different modelling 
approaches.
Once a concrete problem instance is identified, it should be com-
pared with the state-of-the-art classical algorithms. Two illustrative 
applications (discussed further in the Supplementary information) 
are financial asset allocation and the sustainable energy transition: 

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Nature Reviews Physics | Volume 6 | December 2024 | 718–735 730
Review article
although these may not be the first domains to benefit from quantum 
advantage in optimization, they are well suited to illustrate different 
levels of modelling complexity, data requirements and the scale needed 
for real-world applications. The resulting problems, including all intro-
duced features, can be difficult to solve classically. Such a playground to 
construct real-world motivated benchmarking problems with increas-
ingly complex features is essential to test algorithms and track progress 
from toy examples towards practically relevant problems.
The second direction involves finding application-agnostic (pos-
sibly hand-crafted) optimization problem instances and the corre-
sponding (heuristic) quantum algorithms that can outperform the best 
classical algorithms. If (artificial) instances are found where quantum 
algorithms excel, it might be then possible to discover related appli-
cations or understand the source of the advantage and extend it to 
broader classes of problems or algorithms. These instances may even 
motivate completely new algorithmic primitives.
An example in which quantum algorithms might achieve a prov-
ably exponential speedup over the best-known classical algorithms is 
optimization problems, which are reductions (for example, factoring 
problems222,223). However, such examples are unlikely to occur in prac-
tice other than by encoding problems that are in NP  ∩ BQP. Here, we 
suggest an empirical approach to identify more generally applicable 
quantum heuristics and less formal problem structures in which these 
heuristics have an advantage in certain instances.
For the third direction, theoretical understanding of the potential 
and the limitations of quantum optimization algorithms should be 
enhanced, and new algorithms developed that ideally achieve more 
than a quadratic speedup. This includes research on exact algorithms, 
approximations and heuristics, as well as answering more general 
questions such as about the potential of quantum optimization in the 
average case in contrast to the worst case. Theoretical insights help 
to identify promising directions for empirical testing and to explore 
scenarios that cannot be tested empirically yet. For instance, to enable 
practical advantages, there should be a move away from relying on 
QRAM for designing quantum optimization algorithms with rigorous 
quantum speedups: although the QRAM model has led to elegant 
results, its physical realization remains a distant possibility at best. 
Furthermore, finding quantum speedups beyond quadratic is crucial 
for practical quantum advantage 224. New theories can inspire new 
algorithms that address this difficult task, unlock new problem classes 
and create opportunities to find problem instances that may benefit 
from quantum optimization.
T o conclude, use of quantum hardware is already critical in 
accelerating progress towards quantum advantage. Simultaneously, 
state-of-the-art classical optimization must be leveraged to identify 
where better solutions are needed. Empirical studies do not replace 
theoretical research, but rather they complement each other.
Outlook
We have provided a comprehensive overview of the potential, the chal-
lenges and the emerging research areas in quantum optimization. We 
observed that although complexity theory is useful as a guide to prov-
able performance guarantees, it may not always be useful for finding 
practical quantum advantage. This underscores the need to develop 
and analyse quantum heuristics to augment theoretical research. We 
have highlighted key problem classes in optimization, reviewed exist-
ing algorithms and suggested new research directions. We have also 
discussed the importance of benchmarking for identifying quantum 
advantage.
As quantum hardware evolves, a new era is beginning in which 
progress in quantum algorithms comes from both theoretical analysis 
and empirical methods. There is a strong need to continue discovering 
new theories and algorithms with provable performance guarantees, 
but there must also be increased development of quantum heuristics 
and benchmarking of their performance on real quantum computers. 
The improving quantum capabilities unlock opportunities to further 
advance quantum optimization (including the co-design of quantum 
algorithms that account for hardware limitations, discussed in the Sup-
plementary information). Even if there is no immediate practical quan-
tum advantage, the intuition gained from running experiments on real 
hardware will at least enable quick validation of proposals and may also 
inspire new theoretical research.
In addition to technical advances in quantum optimization, there 
is also the question of responsible use of this new technology. Future 
research should be done with the awareness that optimization use cases 
occur in a multitude of contexts — some with positive societal impact, 
others with nefarious intent. We hope that open scientific discussions 
will encourage the advance of quantum optimization and we advocate 
responsible use of the insights presented in this article. Where appli-
cations of quantum optimization algorithms are chosen and funded, 
we encourage the prioritization of those with positive social impact.
Quantum optimization holds vast potential for various applica -
tions, but challenges remain in demonstrating practical quantum 
advantage. When a tangible quantum advantage is demonstrated, 
we expect that quantum optimization will rapidly influence many 
domains, given the widespread relevance of optimization.
Published online: 28 October 2024
References
1. Grover, L. K. A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database search. In Proc. Twenty-Eighth 
Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing 212–219 (Association for Computing 
Machinery, 1996).
2. Kadowaki, T. & Nishimori, H. Quantum annealing in the transverse Ising model. Phys. Rev. E 
58, 5355 (1998).
3. Farhi, E., Goldstone, J., Gutmann, S. & Sipser, M. Quantum computation by adiabatic 
evolution. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0001106 (2000).
4. Farhi, E., Goldstone, J. & Gutmann, S. A quantum approximate optimization algorithm. 
Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1411.4028 (2014).
5. Liśkiewicz, M. & Schuster, M. R. A new upper bound for the traveling salesman problem 
in cubic graphs. J. Discrete Algorithms 27, 1–20 (2014).
6. Applegate, D. L., Bixby, R. E., Chvátal, V. & Cook, W. J. On the solution of traveling 
salesman problems. Doc. Math. 3, 645–656 (1998).
7. Applegate, D. L., Bixby, R. E., Chvátal, V. & Cook, W. J. Finding Tours in the TSP. Report  
No. 99885 (Univ. Bonn, 1999).
8. Cook, W. J., Cunningham, W. H., Pulleyblank, W. R. & Schrijver, A. in Combinatorial 
Optimization (eds Cook, W. J. et al.) 356 (John Wiley & Sons, 1997).
9. Cook, W. J., Applegate, D. L., Bixby, R. E. & Chvatal, V. The Traveling Salesman Problem:  
A Computational Study (Princeton Univ. Press, 2011).
10. Cook, W. J. In Pursuit of the Traveling Salesman: Mathematics at the Limits of Computation 
(Princeton Univ. Press, 2012).
11. Cook, W., Held, S. & Helsgaun, K. Constrained local search for last-mile routing. Transp. Sci. 
https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2022.1185 (2022).
12. Puchinger, J., Raidl, G. R. & Pferschy, U. The multidimensional knapsack problem: 
structure and algorithms. INFORMS J. Comput. 22, 250–265 (2010).
13. Packebusch, T. & Mertens, S. Low autocorrelation binary sequences. J. Phys. A Math. Theor. 
49, 165001 (2016).
14. Spielman, D. A. & Teng, S.-H. Smoothed analysis: an attempt to explain the behavior of 
algorithms in practice. Commun. ACM 52, 76–84 (2009).
15. Gonzalez, T. F. (ed.) Handbook of Approximation Algorithms and Metaheuristics: 
Methologies and Traditional Applications Vol. 1 (CRC Press, 2018).
16. Ausiello, G. et al. Complexity and Approximation: Combinatorial Optimization Problems 
and Their Approximability Properties (Springer, 1999).
17. Gamarnik, D. The overlap gap property: a topological barrier to optimizing over random 
structures. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 118, e2108492118 (2021).
18. Gamarnik, D., Jagannath, A. & Wein, A. S. Hardness of random optimization problems 
for Boolean circuits, low-degree polynomials, and Langevin dynamics. SIAM J. Comput. 
https://doi.org/10.1137/22M150263X (2024).

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Nature Reviews Physics | Volume 6 | December 2024 | 718–735
 731
Review article
19. Chou, C.-N., Love, P. J., Sandhu, J. S. & Shi, J. Limitations of local quantum algorithms on 
random MAX-k-XOR and beyond. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.06049 (2021).
20. Huang, B. & Sellke, M. Tight Lipschitz hardness for optimizing mean field spin glasses. In 
2022 IEEE 63rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS) 312–322 
(IEEE, 2022).
21. Basso, J., Gamarnik, D., Mei, S. & Zhou, L. Performance and limitations of the QAOA at 
constant levels on large sparse hypergraphs and spin glass models. In 2022 IEEE 63rd 
Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS) 335–343 (IEEE, 2022).
22. Chen, A., Huang, N. & Marwaha, K. Local algorithms and the failure of log-depth quantum 
advantage on sparse random CSPs. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01563 (2023).
23. Johnson, D. S. Approximation algorithms for combinatorial problems. J. Comput. Syst. Sci. 
9, 256–278 (1974).
24. Håstad, J. Some optimal inapproximability results. J. ACM 48, 798–859 (2001).
25. Karpinski, M., Lampis, M. & Schmied, R. New inapproximability bounds for TSP. J. Comput. 
Syst. Sci. 81, 1665–1677 (2015).
26. Karlin, A. R., Klein, N. & Gharan, S. O. A (slightly) improved approximation algorithm for 
metric TSP. In Proc. 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing 32–45 
(Association for Computing Machinery, 2021).
27. Lee, A. & Xu, B. Classifying approximation algorithms: understanding the APX complexity 
class. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.01551 (2021).
28. Arora, S. & Barak, B. Computational Complexity: A Modern Approach (Cambridge Univ. 
Press, 2009).
29. Watrous, J. in Encyclopedia of Complexity and Systems Science (ed. Meyers, R. A.) 
7174–7201 (Springer, 2009).
30. Vidick, T. et al. Quantum proofs. Found. Trends Theor. Comput. Sci. 11, 1–215 (2016).
31. Arora, S. Polynomial time approximation schemes for Euclidean traveling salesman and 
other geometric problems. J. ACM 45, 753–782 (1998).
32. Crama, Y., Elloumi, S., Lambert, A. & Rodriguez-Heck, E. Quadratization and 
convexification in polynomial binary optimization. Preprint at https://hal.science/ 
hal-03795395 (2022).
33. Zoufal, C. et al. Variational quantum algorithm for unconstrained black box binary 
optimization: application to feature selection. Quantum 7, 909 (2023).
34. Lucas, A. Ising formulations of many NP problems. Front. Phys. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fphy.2014.00005 (2014).
35. Hadfield, S. On the representation of Boolean and real functions as Hamiltonians for 
quantum computing. ACM Trans. Quantum Comput. 2, 1–21 (2021).
36. Glover, F., Kochenberger, G., Hennig, R. & Du, Y. Quantum bridge analytics I: a tutorial on 
formulating and using QUBO models. Ann. Oper. Res. 314, 141–183 (2022).
37. Xavier, P. M. et al. QUBO.jl: a Julia ecosystem for quadratic unconstrained binary 
optimization. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.02577 (2023).
38. Karimi, S. & Ronagh, P. Practical integer-to-binary mapping for quantum annealers. 
Quantum Inf. Process. 18, 94 (2019).
39. Sawaya, N. P., Schmitz, A. T. & Hadfield, S. Encoding trade-offs and design toolkits in 
quantum algorithms for discrete optimization: coloring, routing, scheduling, and other 
problems. Quantum 7, 1111 (2023).
40. Biamonte, J. Nonperturbative k-body to two-body commuting conversion hamiltonians 
and embedding problem instances into Ising spins. Phys. Rev. A 77, 052331 (2008).
41. Babbush, R., O’Gorman, B. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. Resource efficient gadgets for compiling 
adiabatic quantum optimization problems. Ann. Phys. 525, 877–888 (2013).
42. Barahona, F. On the computational complexity of Ising spin glass models. J. Phys. A Math. 
Gen. 15, 3241 (1982).
43. Punnen, A. P. (ed.) The Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization Problem: Theory, 
Algorithms, and Applications (Springer, 2022).
44. Finnila, A., Gomez, M., Sebenik, C., Stenson, C. & Doll, J. Quantum annealing: a new 
method for minimizing multidimensional functions. Chem. Phys. Lett. 219, 343–348 (1994).
45. Kato, T. On the adiabatic theorem of quantum mechanics. J. Phys. Soc. Jpn 5, 435–439 
(1950).
46. van Dam, W., Mosca, M. & Vazirani, U. How powerful is adiabatic quantum computation? 
In Proc. 42nd IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science 279–287 (IEEE, 2001).
47. Matsuda, Y., Nishimori, H. & Katzgraber, H. G. Ground-state statistics from annealing 
algorithms: quantum versus classical approaches. New J. Phys. 11, 073021 (2009).
48. Boixo, S., Albash, T., Spedalieri, F. M., Chancellor, N. & Lidar, D. A. Experimental signature 
of programmable quantum annealing. Nat. Commun. 4, 2067 (2013).
49. Albash, T. & Lidar, D. A. Demonstration of a scaling advantage for a quantum annealer 
over simulated annealing. Phys. Rev. X 8, 031016 (2018).
50. Wurtz, J. & Love, P. Maxcut quantum approximate optimization algorithm performance 
guarantees for p  > 1. Phys. Rev. A 103, 042612 (2021).
51. Ozaeta, A., van Dam, W. & McMahon, P. L. Expectation values from the single-layer 
quantum approximate optimization algorithm on Ising problems. Quantum Sci. Technol. 
7, 045036 (2022).
52. Farhi, E., Goldstone, J., Gutmann, S. & Zhou, L. The quantum approximate optimization 
algorithm and the Sherrington–Kirkpatrick model at infinite size. Quantum 6, 759 (2022).
53. Basso, J., Farhi, E., Marwaha, K., Villalonga, B. & Zhou, L. The quantum approximate 
optimization algorithm at high depth for MaxCut on large-girth regular graphs and the 
Sherrington–Kirkpatrick model. In Proc. 17th Conference on the Theory of Quantum 
Computation, Communication and Cryptography (eds Le Gall, F. & Morimae, T.) 7:1–7:21 
(Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics, 2022).
54. Egger, D. J., Mareček, J. & Woerner, S. Warm-starting quantum optimization. Quantum 5, 
479 (2021).
55. Tate, R., Farhadi, M., Herold, C., Mohler, G. & Gupta, S. Bridging classical and quantum 
with SDP initialized warm-starts for QAOA. ACM Trans. Quantum Comput. 4, 1–39 (2023).
56. Mastropietro, D., Korpas, G., Kungurtsev, V. & Marecek, J. Fleming-Viot helps speed up 
variational quantum algorithms in the presence of barren plateaus. Preprint at https://
arxiv.org/abs/2311.18090 (2023).
57. Bravyi, S., Kliesch, A., Koenig, R. & Tang, E. Obstacles to variational quantum optimization 
from symmetry protection. Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 260505 (2020).
58. Bravyi, S., Kliesch, A., Koenig, R. & Tang, E. Hybrid quantum-classical algorithms for 
approximate graph coloring. Quantum 6, 678 (2022).
59. Dupont, M. et al. Quantum-enhanced greedy combinatorial optimization solver. Sci. Adv. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adi0487 (2023).
60. Brady, L. T. & Hadfield, S. Iterative quantum algorithms for maximum independent set:  
a tale of low-depth quantum algorithms. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.13110 (2023).
61. Finžgar, J. R., Kerschbaumer, A., Schuetz, M. J. A., Mendl, C. B. & Katzgraber, H. G. 
Quantum-informed recursive optimization algorithms. PRX Quantum 5, 020327  
(2024).
62. Fuller, B. et al. Approximate solutions of combinatorial problems via quantum 
relaxations. IEEE Trans. Quantum Eng. 5, 1–15 (2024).
63. Teramoto, K., Raymond, R., Wakakuwa, E. & Imai, H. Quantum-relaxation based optimization 
algorithms: theoretical extensions. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.09481 (2023).
64. Goemans, M. X. & Williamson, D. P. Improved approximation algorithms for maximum cut 
and satisfiability problems using semidefinite programming. J. ACM 42, 1115–1145 (1995).
65. Farhi, E., Gamarnik, D. & Gutmann, S. The quantum approximate optimization algorithm  
needs to see the whole graph: a typical case. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.09002 
(2020).
66. Marwaha, K. & Hadfield, S. Bounds on approximating max k XOR with quantum and 
classical local algorithms. Quantum 6, 757 (2022).
67. Chou, C.-N., Love, P. J., Sandhu, J. S. & Shi, J. Limitations of local quantum algorithms on 
random MAX-k-XOR and beyond. In Proc. 49th International Colloquium on Automata, 
Languages, and Programming (eds Bojańczyk, M. et al.) 41:1–41:20 (Leibniz International 
Proceedings in Informatics, 2022).
68. McArdle, S. et al. Variational ansatz-based quantum simulation of imaginary time 
evolution. npj Quantum Inf. 5, 75 (2019).
69. Motta, M. et al. Determining eigenstates and thermal states on a quantum computer 
using quantum imaginary time evolution. Nat. Phys. 16, 205–210 (2020).
70. Lin, S.-H., Dilip, R., Green, A. G., Smith, A. & Pollmann, F. Real- and imaginary-time 
evolution with compressed quantum circuits. PRX Quantum 2, 010342 (2021).
71. Yuan, X., Endo, S., Zhao, Q., Li, Y. & Benjamin, S. C. Theory of variational quantum 
simulation. Quantum 3, 191 (2019).
72. Gacon, J., Zoufal, C., Carleo, G. & Woerner, S. Stochastic approximation of variational 
quantum imaginary time evolution. In Proc. 2023 IEEE International Conference on 
Quantum Computing and Engineering 129–139 (IEEE, 2023).
73. Aharonov, D. & Naveh, T. Quantum np — a survey. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/ 
quant-ph/0210077 (2002).
74. Barkoutsos, P. K., Nannicini, G., Robert, A., Tavernelli, I. & Woerner, S. Improving 
variational quantum optimization using CVaR. Quantum 4, 256 (2020).
75. Barron, S. V. et al. Provable bounds for noise-free expectation values computed from 
noisy samples. Nat. Comput. Sci. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-024-00709-1 (2023).
76. Li, L., Fan, M., Coram, M., Riley, P. & Leichenauer, S. Quantum optimization with a novel 
Gibbs objective function and ansatz architecture search. Phys. Rev. Res. 2, 023074 (2020).
77. Gilliam, A., Woerner, S. & Gonciulea, C. Grover adaptive search for constrained 
polynomial binary optimization. Quantum 5, 428 (2021).
78. Montanaro, A. Quantum speedup of branch-and-bound algorithms. Phys. Rev. Res. 2, 
013056 (2020).
79. Hadfield, S. et al. Quantum approximate optimization with hard and soft constraints. 
In Proc. Second International Workshop on Post Moores Era Supercomputing 15–21 
(Association for Computing Machinery, 2017).
80. Hadfield, S. et al. From the quantum approximate optimization algorithm to a quantum 
alternating operator ansatz. Algorithms 12, 34 (2019).
81. Wang, Z., Rubin, N. C., Dominy, J. M. & Rieffel, E. G. xy mixers: analytical and numerical 
results for the quantum alternating operator ansatz. Phys. Rev. A 101, 012320 (2020).
82. Cook, J., Eidenbenz, S. & Bärtschi, A. The quantum alternating operator ansatz on 
maximum k-vertex cover. In Proc. 2020 IEEE International Conference on Quantum 
Computing and Engineering 83–92 (IEEE, 2020).
83. Bärtschi, A. & Eidenbenz, S. Grover mixers for QAOA: shifting complexity from mixer 
design to state preparation. In Proc. 2020 IEEE International Conference on Quantum 
Computing and Engineering 72–82 (IEEE, 2020).
84. Golden, J., Bärtschi, A., Eidenbenz, S. & O’Malley, D. Numerical evidence for exponential 
speed-up of QAOA over unstructured search for approximate constrained optimization. 
In Proc. 2023 IEEE International Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering 
496–505 (IEEE, 2023).
85. Herman, D. et al. Constrained optimization via quantum zeno dynamics. Commun. Phys. 
6, 219 (2023).
86. Garg, A., Kothari, R., Netrapalli, P. & Sherif, S. No quantum speedup over gradient descent 
for non-smooth convex optimization. In Proc. 12th Innovations in Theoretical Computer 
Science Conference (Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics, 2021).
87. Garg, A., Kothari, R., Netrapalli, P. & Sherif, S. Near-optimal lower bounds for convex 
optimization for all orders of smoothness. In Proc. Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems 34 (eds Ranzato, M. et al.) 29874–29884 (NeurIPS, 2021).

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Nature Reviews Physics | Volume 6 | December 2024 | 718–735 732
Review article
88. Grötschel, M., Lovász, L. & Schrijver, A. Geometric Algorithms and Combinatorial 
Optimization Vol. 2 (Springer, 2012).
89. van Apeldoorn, J., Gilyén, A., Gribling, S. & de Wolf, R. Convex optimization using 
quantum oracles. Quantum 4, 220 (2020).
90. Chakrabarti, S., Childs, A. M., Li, T. & Wu, X. Quantum algorithms and lower bounds for 
convex optimization. Quantum 4, 221 (2020).
91. Arora, S., Hazan, E. & Kale, S. Fast algorithms for approximate semidefinite programming 
using the multiplicative weights update method. In Proc. 46th Annual IEEE Symposium 
on Foundations of Computer Science 339–348 (IEEE, 2005).
92. Brandao, F. G. S. L. & Svore, K. M. Quantum speed-ups for solving semidefinite programs. 
In Proc. 2017 IEEE 58th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science 415–426 
(IEEE, 2017).
93. Van Apeldoorn, J., Gilyén, A., Gribling, S. & de Wolf, R. Quantum SDP-solvers: better 
upper and lower bounds. Quantum 4, 230 (2020).
94. Brandão, F. G. S. L. et al. Quantum SDP solvers: large speed-ups, optimality, and 
applications to quantum learning. In Proc. 46th International Colloquium on Automata, 
Languages, and Programming (eds Baier, C. et al.) 27 (Leibniz International Proceedings 
in Informatics, 2019).
95. van Apeldoorn, J. & Gilyén, A. Improvements in quantum SDP-solving with applications. 
In Proc. 46th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming 
(Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics, 2019).
96. van Apeldoorn, J. A Quantum View on Convex Optimization. PhD thesis, Univ. Amsterdam 
(2020).
97. Lee, Y. T., Sidford, A. & Wong, S. C.-W. A faster cutting plane method and its implications 
for combinatorial and convex optimization. In Proc. 2015 IEEE 56th Annual Symposium 
on Foundations of Computer Science 1049–1065 (IEEE, 2015).
98. Marecek, J. & Akhriev, A. A cutting-plane method for semidefinite programming with potential  
applications on noisy quantum devices. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.03400 2021).
99. Kerenidis, I. & Prakash, A. A quantum interior point method for LPs and SDPs. ACM Trans. 
Quantum Comput. 1, 1–32 (2020).
100. Childs, A. M., Kothari, R. & Somma, R. D. Quantum algorithm for systems of linear equations 
with exponentially improved dependence on precision. SIAM J. Comput. 46, 1920–1950 (2017).
101. Chakraborty, S., Gilyén, A. & Jeffery, S. The power of block-encoded matrix powers: 
improved regression techniques via faster Hamiltonian simulation. In Proc. 46th 
International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming 33:1–33:14 (Leibniz 
International Proceedings in Informatics, 2019).
102. van Apeldoorn, J., Cornelissen, A., Gilyén, A. & Nannicini, G. Quantum tomography using 
state-preparation unitaries. In Proc. 2023 Annual ACM–SIAM Symposium on Discrete 
Algorithms (eds Bansal, N. & Nagarajan, V.) 1265–1318 (SIAM, 2023).
103. Augustino, B., Nannicini, G., Terlaky, T. & Zuluaga, L. F. Quantum interior point methods 
for semidefinite optimization. Quantum 7, 1110 (2023).
104. Mohammadisiahroudi, M., Fakhimi, R. & Terlaky, T. Efficient use of quantum linear system 
algorithms in inexact infeasible IPMs for linear optimization. J. Optim. Theory Appl. 202, 
146–183 (2024).
105. Wu, Z., Mohammadisiahroudi, M., Augustino, B., Yang, X. & Terlaky, T. An inexact feasible 
quantum interior point method for linearly constrained quadratic optimization. Entropy 
25, 330 (2023).
106. Giovannetti, V., Lloyd, S. & Maccone, L. Quantum random access memory. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 100, 160501 (2008).
107. Giovannetti, V., Lloyd, S. & Maccone, L. Architectures for a quantum random access 
memory. Phys. Rev. A 78, 052310 (2008).
108. Aaronson, S. Read the fine print. Nat. Phys. 11, 291–293 (2015).
109. Di Matteo, O., Gheorghiu, V. & Mosca, M. Fault tolerant resource estimation of quantum 
random-access memories. IEEE Trans. Quantum Eng. 1, 1–13 (2020).
110. Jaques, S. & Rattew, A. G. QRAM: a survey and critique. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/ 
abs/2305.10310 (2023).
111. Apers, S. & Gribling, S. Quantum speedups for linear programming via interior point 
methods. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.03215 (2023).
112. Van Den Brand, J. et al. Minimum cost flows, MDPs, and l1-regression in nearly linear 
time for dense instances. In Proc. 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of 
Computing 859–869 (Association for Computing Machinery, 2021).
113. Leng, J., Hickman, E., Li, J. & Wu, X. Quantum hamiltonian descent. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/ 
abs/2303.01471 (2023).
114. Augustino, B., Leng, J., Nannicini, G., Terlaky, T. & Wu, X. A quantum central path 
algorithm for linear optimization. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.03977 (2023).
115. Liberti, L. Undecidability and hardness in mixed-integer nonlinear programming. RAIRO Oper. 
Res. 53, 81–109 (2019).
116. Zhang, C. & Li, T. Quantum lower bounds for finding stationary points of nonconvex 
functions. In International Conference on Machine Learning 41268–41299 (PMLR, 2023).
117. Sidford, A. & Zhang, C. Quantum speedups for stochastic optimization. In Proc. 37th 
International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 35300–35330 
(NeurIPS, 2024).
118. Rebentrost, P., Schuld, M., Wossnig, L., Petruccione, F. & Lloyd, S. Quantum gradient 
descent and Newton’s method for constrained polynomial optimization. New J. Phys. 21, 
073023 (2019).
119. Kerenidis, I. & Prakash, A. Quantum gradient descent for linear systems and least 
squares. Phys. Rev. A 101, 022316 (2020).
120. Li, K. et al. Optimizing a polynomial function on a quantum processor. npj Quantum Inf. 7, 
16 (2021).
121. Montanaro, A. Quantum walk speedup of backtracking algorithms. Theory Comput. 14, 
1–24 (2018).
122. Ambainis, A. & Kokainis, M. Quantum algorithm for tree size estimation, with applications 
to backtracking and 2-player games. In Proc. 49th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on 
Theory of Computing 989–1002 (Association for Computing Machinery, 2017).
123. Chakrabarti, S., Minssen, P., Yalovetzky, R. & Pistoia, M. Universal quantum speedup for 
branch-and-bound, branch-and-cut, and tree-search algorithms. Preprint at https://arxiv.
org/abs/2210.03210 (2022).
124. Dalzell, A. M., Pancotti, N., Campbell, E. T. & Brandão, F. G. Mind the gap: achieving a 
super-Grover quantum speedup by jumping to the end. In Proc. 55th Annual ACM Symposium 
on Theory of Computing, 1131–1144 (Association for Computing Machinery, 2023).
125. Gambella, C., Simonetto, A., Mevissen, M. & Marecek, J. Mixed-binary constrained 
optimization on quantum computers. US patent 16/395,560 (2020).
126. Gambella, C. & Simonetto, A. Multiblock ADMM heuristics for mixed-binary optimization 
on classical and quantum computers. IEEE Trans. Quantum Eng. 1, 1–22 (2020).
127. Chang, C.-Y., Jones, E., Yao, Y., Graf, P. & Jain, R. On hybrid quantum and classical 
computing algorithms for mixed-integer programming. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/ 
abs/2010.07852 (2020).
128. Braine, L., Egger, D. J., Glick, J. & Woerner, S. Quantum algorithms for mixed binary 
optimization applied to transaction settlement. IEEE Trans. Quantum Eng. 2, 1–8  
(2021).
129. Le, T. V. & Kekatos, V. Variational quantum eigensolver with constraints (VQEC): solving 
constrained optimization problems via VQE. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.08502 
(2023).
130. Bertsekas, D. P. Constrained Optimization and Lagrange Multiplier Methods (Academic 
Press, 2014).
131. Birgin, E. G. & Martínez, J. M. Practical Augmented Lagrangian Methods for Constrained 
Optimization (SIAM, 2014).
132. Aspman, J., Bareilles, G., Kungurtsev, V., Marecek, J. & Takáč, M. Hybrid methods in 
polynomial optimisation. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16122 (2023).
133. Dantzig, G. B. & Wolfe, P. Decomposition principle for linear programs. Oper. Res. 8, 
101–111 (1960).
134. Parrilo, P. A. Structured Semidefinite Programs and Semialgebraic Geometry Methods in 
Robustness and Optimization (California Institute of Technology, 2000).
135. Lasserre, J. B. Global optimization with polynomials and the problem of moments. SIAM 
J. Optim. 11, 796–817 (2001).
136. Schoenebeck, G. Linear level Lasserre lower bounds for certain k-CSPs. In 2008 49th 
Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science 593–602 (IEEE, 2008).
137. Burer, S. On the copositive representation of binary and continuous nonconvex quadratic 
programs. Math. Program. 120, 479–495 (2009).
138. Dickinson, P. J. Geometry of the copositive and completely positive cones. J. Math. Anal. 
Appl. 380, 377–395 (2011).
139. Dickinson, P. J. & Gijben, L. On the computational complexity of membership problems 
for the completely positive cone and its dual. Comput. Optim. Appl. 57, 403–415 (2014).
140. Brown, R., Neira, D. E. B., Venturelli, D. & Pavone, M. A copositive framework for analysis 
of hybrid ising-classical algorithms. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.13630 (2023).
141. Ambainis, A. et al. Quantum speedups for exponential-time dynamic programming 
algorithms. In Proc. Thirtieth Annual ACM–SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms  
(ed. Chan, T. M.) 1783–1793 (SIAM, 2019).
142. Gaspers, S. & Li, J. Z. Quantum algorithms for graph coloring and other partitioning, covering, 
and packing problems. In Proc. 51st International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and 
Programming 69:1–69:20 (Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics, 2024).
143. Shimizu, K. & Mori, R. Exponential-time quantum algorithms for graph coloring problems. 
In Proc. 14th Latin American Symposium (eds Kohayakawa, Y. & Miyazawa, F. K.) 387–398 
(Springer, 2020).
144. Miyamoto, M., Iwamura, M., Kise, K. & Gall, F. L. Quantum speedup for the minimum 
Steiner tree problem. In Proc. 26th International Conference, COCOON 2020 (eds Kim, D. 
et al.) 234–245 (Springer, 2020).
145. Kļevickis, V., Prūsis, K. & Vihrovs, J. Quantum speedups for treewidth. In Proc. 17th Conference 
on the Theory of Quantum Computation, Communication and Cryptography (eds Gall, F. L.  
& Morimae, T.) 11:1–11:18 (Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics, 2022).
146. Grange, C., Bourreau, E., Poss, M. & T’Kindt, V. Quantum speed-ups for single-machine 
scheduling problems. In Proc. Companion Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary 
Computation 2224–2231 (Association for Computing Machinery, 2023).
147. Bardi, M. et al. Optimal Control and Viscosity Solutions of Hamilton–Jacobi–Bellman 
Equations Vol. 12 (Springer, 1997).
148. Baras, J. S. & Kurzhanski, A. Nonlinear filtering: the set-membership (bounding) and the 
h∞ techniques. In Proc. NOLCOS’95 IFAC Workshop 409–415 (IFAC, 1995).
149. Cornelissen, A. J. Quantum gradient estimation and its application to quantum 
reinforcement learning. Master thesis, TU Delft (2018).
150. Dunjko, V., Taylor, J. M. & Briegel, H. J. Quantum-enhanced machine learning. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
117, 130501 (2016).
151. Jerbi, S., Cornelissen, A., Ozols, M. & Dunjko, V. Quantum policy gradient algorithms. 
In Proc. 18th Conference on the Theory of Quantum Computation, Communication and 
Cryptography (eds Fawzi, O. & Walter, M.) 13:1–13:24 (Leibniz International Proceedings  
in Informatics, 2023).
152. Cornelissen, A., Hamoudi, Y. & Jerbi, S. Near-optimal quantum algorithms for multivariate 
mean estimation. In Proc. 54th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing 
33–43 (Association for Computing Machinery, 2022).

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Nature Reviews Physics | Volume 6 | December 2024 | 718–735
 733
Review article
153. Dunjko, V., Liu, Y.-K., Wu, X. & Taylor, J. M. Exponential improvements for quantum-accessible 
reinforcement learning. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.11160 (2017).
154. Jerbi, S., Gyurik, C., Marshall, S., Briegel, H. & Dunjko, V. Parametrized quantum policies 
for reinforcement learning. In Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 
(eds Ranzato, M. et al.) 28362–28375 (NeurIPS, 2021).
155. Skolik, A., Jerbi, S. & Dunjko, V. Quantum agents in the gym: a variational quantum 
algorithm for deep Q-learning. Quantum 6, 720 (2022).
156. Dunning, I., Gupta, S. & Silberholz, J. What works best when? A systematic evaluation of 
heuristics for Max-Cut and QUBO. INFORMS J. Comput. 30, 608–624 (2018).
157. Jain, R. The Art of Computer Systems Performance Analysis: Techniques for Experimental 
Design, Measurement, Simulation, and Modeling (Wiley, 1991).
158. Koch, T., Berthold, T., Pedersen, J. & Vanaret, C. Progress in mathematical programming 
solvers from 2001 to 2020. EURO J. Comput. Optim. 10, 100031 (2022).
159. Bartz-Beielstein, T. et al. Benchmarking in optimization: best practice and open issues. 
Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.03488 (2020).
160. Müller, M., Whitney, B., Henschel, R. & Kumaran, K. in Encyclopedia of Parallel Computing 
(ed. Padua, D.) 1886–1893 (Springer, 2011).
161. Dongarra, J. J., Moler, C. B., Bunch, J. R. & Stewart, G. W. LINPACK Users’ Guide (SIAM, 1979).
162. Froleyks, N., Heule, M., Iser, M., Järvisalo, M. & Suda, M. Sat competition 2020. Artif. Intell. 
301, 103572 (2021).
163. Lubinski, T. et al. Application-oriented performance benchmarks for quantum 
computing. IEEE Trans. Quantum Eng. 4, 1–32 (2023).
164. Tomesh, T. et al. SupermarQ: a scalable quantum benchmark suite. In Proc. 2022 IEEE 
International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) 587–603 
(IEEE Computer Society, 2022).
165. Martiel, S., Ayral, T. & Allouche, C. Benchmarking quantum coprocessors in an 
application-centric, hardware-agnostic, and scalable way. IEEE Trans. Quantum Eng. 2, 
1–11 (2021).
166. Lubinski, T. et al. Optimization applications as quantum performance benchmarks.  
ACM Trans. Quantum Comput. 5, 1–44 (2024).
167. Rønnow, T. F. et al. Defining and detecting quantum speedup. Science 345, 420–424 (2014).
168. King, J., Yarkoni, S., Nevisi, M. M., Hilton, J. P. & McGeoch, C. C. Benchmarking a 
quantum annealing processor with the time-to-target metric. Preprint at https://arxiv.
org/abs/1508.05087 (2015).
169. Albash, T., Martin-Mayor, V. & Hen, I. Temperature scaling law for quantum annealing 
optimizers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 110502 (2017).
170. Juenger, M. et al. Performance of a quantum annealer for Ising ground state 
computations on chimera graphs. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.11965 (2019).
171. Jünger, M. et al. Quantum annealing versus digital computing: an experimental 
comparison. ACM J. Exp. Algorithmics 26,1–30 (2021).
172. Perdomo-Ortiz, A. et al. Readiness of quantum optimization machines for industrial 
applications. Phys. Rev. Appl. 12, 014004 (2019).
173. Grant, E., Humble, T. S. & Stump, B. Benchmarking quantum annealing controls with 
portfolio optimization. Phys. Rev. Appl. 15, 014012 (2021).
174. Tasseff, B. et al. On the emerging potential of quantum annealing hardware for 
combinatorial optimization. J. Heuristics 30, 325–358, (2024).
175. Willsch, M., Willsch, D., Jin, F., De Raedt, H. & Michielsen, K. Benchmarking the quantum 
approximate optimization algorithm. Quantum Inf. Process. 19, 197 (2020).
176. Mohseni, N., McMahon, P. L. & Byrnes, T. Ising machines as hardware solvers of 
combinatorial optimization problems. Nat. Rev. Phys. 4, 363–379 (2022).
177. Finžgar, J. R., Ross, P., Hölscher, L., Klepsch, J. & Luckow, A. Quark: a framework for 
quantum computing application benchmarking. In Proc. 2022 IEEE International 
Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering 226–237 (IEEE, 2022).
178. Bäumer, E. et al. Efficient long-range entanglement using dynamic circuits. PRX Quantum 
5, 030339 (2024).
179. Applegate, D. L., Bixby, R. E., Chvatál, V. & Cook, W. J. The Traveling Salesman Problem:  
A Computational Study (Princeton Univ. Press, 2006).
180. Rehfeldt, D., Koch, T. & Shinano, Y. Faster exact solution of sparse MaxCut and QUBO 
problems. Math. Program. Comput. 15, 445–470 (2023).
181. Glover, F., Lewis, M. & Kochenberger, G. Logical and inequality implications for reducing 
the size and difficulty of quadratic unconstrained binary optimization problems. Eur. J. 
Oper. Res. 265, 829–842 (2018).
182. Tsukamoto, S., Takatsu, M., Matsubara, S. & Tamura, H. An accelerator architecture for 
combinatorial optimization problems. Fujitsu Sci. Tech. J. 53, 8–13 (2017).
183. Matsubara, S. et al. Digital annealer for high-speed solving of combinatorial optimization 
problems and its applications. In Proc. 2020 25th Asia and South Pacific Design 
Automation Conference 667–672 (IEEE, 2020).
184. Yoshimura, C., Hayashi, M., Takemoto, T. & Yamaoka, M. CMOS annealing machine:  
a domain-specific architecture for combinatorial optimization problem. In Proc. 2020 
25th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference 673–678 (IEEE, 2020).
185. Goto, H. Bifurcation-based adiabatic quantum computation with a nonlinear oscillator 
network. Sci. Rep. 6, 21686 (2016).
186. Wang, J., Ebler, D., Wong, K. Y. M., Hui, D. S. W. & Sun, J. Bifurcation behaviors shape how 
continuous physical dynamics solves discrete Ising optimization. Nat. Commun. 14, 2510 
(2023).
187. Krantz, P. et al. A quantum engineer’s guide to superconducting qubits. Appl. Phys. Rev. 
6, 021318 (2019).
188. Hangleiter, D., Carolan, J. & Thébault, K. Analogue Quantum Simulation: A New Instrument 
for Scientific Understanding (Springer, 2022).
189. Bloch, I., Dalibard, J. & Nascimbène, S. Quantum simulations with ultracold quantum 
gases. Nat. Phys. 8, 267–276 (2012).
190. Trotzky, S. et al. Probing the relaxation towards equilibrium in an isolated strongly 
correlated one-dimensional Bose gas. Nat. Phys. 8, 325–330 (2012).
191. Choi, J.-Y. et al. Exploring the many-body localization transition in two dimensions. 
Science 352, 1547–1552 (2016).
192. Parsons, M. F. et al. Site-resolved measurement of the spin-correlation function in the 
Fermi–Hubbard model. Science 353, 1253–1256 (2016).
193. Bernien, H. et al. Probing many-body dynamics on a 51-atom quantum simulator. Nature 
551, 579–584 (2017).
194. Blatt, R. & Roos, C. F. Quantum simulations with trapped ions. Nat. Phys. 8, 277–284  
(2012).
195. Zhang, J. et al. Observation of a many-body dynamical phase transition with a 53-qubit 
quantum simulator. Nature 551, 601–604 (2017).
196. Arrazola, I., Pedernales, J. S., Lamata, L. & Solano, E. Digital–analog quantum simulation 
of spin models in trapped ions. Sci. Rep. 6, 30534 (2016).
197. Albash, T. & Lidar, D. A. Adiabatic quantum computation. Rev. Mod. Phys. 90, 015002 
(2018).
198. McGeoch, C. C. in Adiabatic Quantum Computation and Quantum Annealing 9–27 
(Springer, 2014).
199. Johnson, M. W. et al. Quantum annealing with manufactured spins. Nature 473, 194–198 
(2011).
200. Ebadi, S. et al. Quantum optimization of maximum independent set using Rydberg atom 
arrays. Science 376, 1209–1215 (2022).
201. Nocedal, J. & Wright, S. J. Numerical Optimization 2nd edn (Springer, 2006).
202. Bonnans, J., Gilbert, J., Lemarechal, C. & Sagastizábal, C. Numerical Optimization: 
Theoretical and Practical Aspects (Springer, 2006).
203. Clark, B. N., Colbourn, C. J. & Johnson, D. S. Unit disk graphs. Discrete Math. 86, 165–177 
(1990).
204. Pichler, H., Wang, S.-T., Zhou, L., Choi, S. & Lukin, M. D. Quantum optimization for 
maximum independent set using Rydberg atom arrays. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/ 
1808.10816 (2018).
205. Wu, X. et al. A concise review of Rydberg atom based quantum computation and 
quantum simulation. Chin. Phys. B 30, 020305 (2021).
206. Andrist, R. S. et al. Hardness of the maximum-independent-set problem on unit-disk 
graphs and prospects for quantum speedups. Phys. Rev. Res. 5, 043277 (2023).
207. Pisinger, D. The quadratic knapsack problem — a survey. Discrete Appl. Math. 155, 
623–648 (2007).
208. Cornuéjols, G. & Dawande, M. A class of hard small 01 programs. INFORMS J. Comput. 11, 
205–210 (1999).
209. Shaydulin, R. et al. Evidence of scaling advantage for the quantum approximate 
optimization algorithm on a classically intractable problem. Sci. Adv. 10, eadm6761 
(2024).
210. Burkard, R. E., Karisch, S. E. & Rendl, F. QAPLIB — a quadratic assignment problem library. 
J. Glob. Optim. 10, 391–403 (1997).
211. de Werra, D. in Annals of Discrete Mathematics (11): Studies on Graphs and Discrete 
Programming (ed. Hansen, P.) 381–395 (Elsevier, 1981).
212. Van Bulck, D. & Goossens, D. The international timetabling competition on sports 
timetabling (ITC2021). Eur. J. Oper. Res. 308, 1249–1267 (2023).
213. Bulck, D. V. et al. Which algorithm to select in sports timetabling? Preprint at https://arxiv.
org/abs/2309.03229 (2023).
214. Slongo, F., Hauke, P., Faccioli, P. & Micheletti, C. Quantum-inspired encoding enhances 
stochastic sampling of soft matter systems. Sci. Adv. 9, eadi0204 (2023).
215. Wolsey, L. Integer Programming 2nd edn (John Wiley & Sons, 2020).
216. Devriendt, J., Gocht, S., Demirović, E., Nordström, J. & Stuckey, P. J. Cutting to the core 
of pseudo-Boolean optimization: combining core-guided search with cutting planes 
reasoning. In Proc. Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 3750–3758 
(Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, 2021).
217. Prasad, M. R., Biere, A. & Gupta, A. A survey of recent advances in SAT-based formal 
verification. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. 7, 156–173 (2005).
218. Nethercote, N. et al. MiniZinc: towards a standard CP modelling language. In Proc. 13th 
International Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming  
(ed. Bessière, C.) 529–543 (Springer, 2007).
219. Kuroiwa, R. & Beck, J. C. Solving domain-independent dynamic programming problems 
with anytime heuristic search. In Proc. Thirty-Third International Conference on 
Automated Planning and Scheduling 245–253 (Association for the Advancement of 
Artificial Intelligence, 2023).
220. Kim, Y. et al. Evidence for the utility of quantum computing before fault tolerance. Nature 
618, 500–505 (2023).
221. Anand, S., Temme, K., Kandala, A. & Zaletel, M. Classical benchmarking of zero noise 
extrapolation beyond the exactly-verifiable regime. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/ 
2306.17839 (2023).
222. Pirnay, N., Ulitzsch, V., Wilde, F., Eisert, J. & Seifert, J.-P. An in-principle super-polynomial 
quantum advantage for approximating combinatorial optimization problems. Sci. Adv. 10, 
eadj5170 (2024).
223. Szegedy, M. Quantum advantage for combinatorial optimization problems, simplified. 
Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.12572 (2022).
224. Aaronson, S. How much structure is needed for huge quantum speedups? Talk Delivered 
at the 28th Solvay Physics Conference. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.06930 (2022).

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Nature Reviews Physics | Volume 6 | December 2024 | 718–735 734
Review article
225. Durr, C. & Hoyer, P. A quantum algorithm for finding the minimum. Preprint at  
https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9607014 (1999).
226. Bulger, D., Baritompa, W. P. & Wood, G. R. Implementing pure adaptive search with 
Grover’s quantum algorithm. J. Optim. Theory Appl. 116, 517–529 (2003).
227. Baritompa, W. P., Bulger, D. W. & Wood, G. R. Grover’s quantum algorithm applied to 
global optimization. SIAM J. Optim. 15, 1170–1184 (2005).
228. Bennett, C. H., Bernstein, E., Brassard, G. & Vazirani, U. Strengths and weaknesses  
of quantum computing. SIAM J. Comput. 26, 1510–1523 (1997).
229. Sommese, A. J. et al. The Numerical Solution of Systems of Polynomials Arising in 
Engineering and Science (World Scientific, 2005).
230. Bapst, V., Foini, L., Krzakala, F., Semerjian, G. & Zamponi, F. The quantum adiabatic 
algorithm applied to random optimization problems: the quantum spin glass 
perspective. Phys. Rep. 523, 127–205 (2013).
231. Knysh, S. Zero-temperature quantum annealing bottlenecks in the spin-glass phase.  
Nat. Commun. 7, 12370 (2016).
232. Isakov, S. V. et al. Understanding quantum tunneling through quantum Monte Carlo 
simulations. Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 180402 (2016).
233. Mohseni, N., Navarrete-Benlloch, C., Byrnes, T. & Marquardt, F. Deep recurrent networks 
predicting the gap evolution in adiabatic quantum computing. Quantum 7, 1039  
(2023).
234. Kitaev, A. Y. Quantum measurements and the Abelian stabilizer problem. Preprint at 
https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9511026 (1995).
235. Nielsen, M. A. & Chuang, I. L. Quantum Computation and Quantum Information 
(Cambridge Univ. Press, 2000).
236. Abrams, D. S. & Lloyd, S. Quantum algorithm providing exponential speed increase for 
finding eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 5162–5165 (1999).
237. Aspuru-Guzik, A., Dutoi, A. D., Love, P. J. & Head-Gordon, M. Simulated quantum 
computation of molecular energies. Science 309, 1704–1707 (2005).
238. Lee, S. et al. Evaluating the evidence for exponential quantum advantage in ground-state 
quantum chemistry. Nat. Commun. 14, 1952 (2023).
239. Shor, P. Algorithms for quantum computation: discrete logarithms and factoring. In Proc. 
35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science 124–134 (IEEE, 1994).
240. Suchsland, P. et al. Algorithmic error mitigation scheme for current quantum processors. 
Quantum 5, 492 (2021).
241. Kirby, W., Motta, M. & Mezzacapo, A. Exact and efficient Lanczos method on a quantum 
computer. Quantum 7, 1018 (2023).
242. Geman, S. & Geman, D. Stochastic relaxation, Gibbs distributions, and the Bayesian 
restoration of images. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. PAMI-6, 721–741 (1984).
243. Krzakała, F., Montanari, A., Ricci-Tersenghi, F., Semerjian, G. & Zdeborová, L. Gibbs states 
and the set of solutions of random constraint satisfaction problems. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 104, 10318–10323 (2007).
244. Aharonov, D., Arad, I. & Vidick, T. The quantum PCP conjecture. ACM SIGACT News 44, 
47–79 (2013).
245. Bravyi, S., Chowdhury, A., Gosset, D. & Wocjan, P. Quantum Hamiltonian complexity in 
thermal equilibrium. Nat. Phys. 18, 1367–1370 (2022).
246. Poulin, D. & Wocjan, P. Sampling from the thermal quantum Gibbs state and evaluating 
partition functions with a quantum computer. Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 220502 (2009).
247. Temme, K., Osborne, T. J., Vollbrecht, K. G., Poulin, D. & Verstraete, F. Quantum 
metropolis sampling. Nature 471, 87–90 (2011).
248. Wu, J. & Hsieh, T. H. Variational thermal quantum simulation via thermofield double 
states. Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 220502 (2019).
249. Wang, Y., Li, G. & Wang, X. Variational quantum Gibbs state preparation with a truncated 
Taylor series. Phys. Rev. Appl. 16, 054035 (2021).
250. Warren, A., Zhu, L., Mayhall, N. J., Barnes, E. & Economou, S. E. Adaptive variational 
algorithms for quantum Gibbs state preparation. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/ 
2203.12757 (2022).
251. Wild, D. S., Sels, D., Pichler, H., Zanoci, C. & Lukin, M. D. Quantum sampling algorithms for 
near-term devices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 100504 (2021).
252. Zhang, D., Bosse, J. L. & Cubitt, T. Dissipative quantum Gibbs sampling. Preprint at  
https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.04526 (2023).
253. Patti, T. L., Kossaifi, J., Anandkumar, A. & Yelin, S. F. Quantum Goemans–Williamson 
algorithm with the Hadamard test and approximate amplitude constraints. Quantum 7, 
1057 (2023).
254. Brandão, F. G. L., Kueng, R. & França, D. S. Faster quantum and classical SDP 
approximations for quadratic binary optimization. Quantum 6, 625 (2022).
255. Peruzzo, A. et al. A variational eigenvalue solver on a photonic quantum processor.  
Nat. Commun. 5, 4213 (2014).
256. McClean, J. R., Romero, J., Babbush, R. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. The theory of variational 
hybrid quantum-classical algorithms. New J. Phys. 18, 023023 (2016).
257. Cerezo, M. et al. Variational quantum algorithms. Nat. Rev. Phys. 3, 625–644 (2021).
258. Bharti, K. et al. Noisy intermediate-scale quantum algorithms. Rev. Mod. Phys. 94, 
015004 (2022).
259. Bittel, L. & Kliesch, M. Training variational quantum algorithms is NP-hard. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
127, 120502 (2021).
260. Clader, B. D. et al. Quantum resources required to block-encode a matrix of classical 
data. IEEE Trans. Quantum Eng. 3, 1–23 (2022).
Acknowledgements
The authors thank J. Eisert and M. Wilde for their valuable feedback and suggestions to further 
improve this paper. A. Ambainis acknowledges the support of the Latvian Quantum Initiative 
under European Union Recovery and Resilience Facility Project No. 2.3.1.1.i.0/1/22/I/CFLA/001 
and the QuantERA II ERA-NET Cofund projects QOPT and HQCC. B.A. and S. Gupta acknowledge 
support from the US Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Contract No. 
HR001120C0046. V.D. acknowledges the support of the Dutch Research Council (NWO/OCW), 
as part of the Quantum Software Consortium programme (Project No. 024.003.037) and of 
the Dutch National Growth Fund (NGF), as part of the Quantum Delta NL programme. S.H. was 
supported by NASA Academic Mission Services Contract No. NNA16BD14C and by DARPA 
under interagency agreement IAA 8839, Annex 114. T. Koch acknowledges support by the BMBF 
Research Campus MODAL (05M14ZAM and 05M20ZBM). S.L. was funded by Free State of 
Thuringia (Thüringer Aufbaubank) through project Quantum Hub Thüringen (2021 FGI 0047), 
by Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie, Germany through the project ‘EnerQuant’ 
(Project No. 03EI1025C) and by the European Union under Horizon Europe Programme. Views 
and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect 
those of the European Union or European Climate, Infrastructure and Environment Executive 
Agency (CINEA). Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible 
for them, Grant Agreement 101080086 — NeQST. J.M. acknowledges the support of the Czech  
Science Foundation (23-07947S). S.M., E.S. and B.C.B.S. were supported by the Hartree National  
Centre for Digital Innovation, a UK Government-funded collaboration between STFC and IBM.  
(IBM, the IBM logo and ibm.com are trademarks of International Business Machines Corp., 
registered in many jurisdictions worldwide. Other product and service names might be 
trademarks of IBM or other companies. The current list of IBM trademarks is available at  
https://www.ibm.com/legal/copytrade.) G.N. acknowledges support by ONR (N000142312585). 
P.R. acknowledges support by the National Research Foundation, Singapore. J.Y. was supported 
in part by the NSERC Discovery under Grant No. RGPIN-2018-04742, the NSERC project FoQaCiA 
under Grant No. ALLRP-569582-21 and the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics. Research 
at Perimeter Institute is supported by the Government of Canada through Innovation, Science 
and Economic Development Canada and by the Province of Ontario through the Ministry of 
Research, Innovation and Science (Los Alamos unlimited release LA-UR-24-22124).
Author contributions
This review was written as part of the Quantum Optimization Working Group initiated in  
July 2023 by IBM Quantum and its partners. The authors are listed alphabetically. All 
authors contributed to the discussions as part of the working group meetings and to 
writing the manuscript and Supplementary information. The discussions on and writing 
of the different sections were led by the following co-authors: A.A. and J.M. coordinated 
the writing of the section ‘Quantum advantage and complexity theory’ (in main text and 
Supplementary information). J.M. and S.W. oversaw Box 1 (and the corresponding section 
in Supplementary information) and the section ‘Problem classes and algorithms’ (in main 
text and Supplementary information). T. Koch and C.Z. coordinated sections ‘Benchmarks’ 
(in main text and Supplementary information), ‘Benchmarking problems’ (in Supplementary 
information) and ‘Demonstrations’ (in Supplementary information). S.W. led the writing of the 
section ‘The path towards quantum advantage’. D.J.E. and S.M. were in charge of the section 
‘Execution on noisy hardware at scale’ (in Supplementary information). C.O’M., M.P., V.V. and 
C.Z. oversaw the section ‘Illustrative industry problems’. S.W. coordinated the overall project.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at  
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42254-024-00770-9.
Peer review information Nature Review Physics thanks James Ostrowski, Leo Zhou and the 
other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this 
article under a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author 
self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the 
terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
© IBM, under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2024
1Institute of Physics, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 2QuSoft, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 3Faculty of Computing, University 
of Latvia, Riga, Latvia. 4Sloan School of Management, Massachussets Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. 5CCS-3 Information Sciences, Los 
Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, USA. 6Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica (CWI), University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Nature Reviews Physics | Volume 6 | December 2024 | 718–735
 735
Review article
7Advanced Network Science Initiative, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM, USA. 8E.ON Digital Technology GmbH, Hannover, Germany. 
9Applied Quantum Algorithms Initiative, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands. 10IBM Quantum, IBM Research Europe — Zurich, Rueschlikon, 
Switzerland. 11IBM Research, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. 12Quantum-Enhanced AI Department, Fraunhofer Institute for 
Cognitive Systems IKS, Munich, Germany. 13Erste Digital GmbH, Erste Group Bank AG, Vienna, Austria. 14IBM Quantum, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, 
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA. 15Institute of Physics, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland. 16Advanced Technology, 
Wells Fargo, New York City, NY, USA. 17Department of Econometrics and Operations Research, Tilburg University, Tilburg, The Netherlands. 18Quantum 
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (QuAIL), NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, USA. 19USRA Research Institute for Advanced Computer 
Science (RIACS), Universities Space Research Association, Mountain View, CA, USA. 20Optimization Department, Fraunhofer ITWM, Kaiserslautern, 
Germany. 21Quantagonia GmbH, Bad Homburg, Germany. 22Applied Algorithmic Intelligence Methods, Zuse Institute Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 23Software 
and Algorithms for Discrete Optimization, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 24Quantum Technologies Group, Emerging Technologies, 
Innovation and Ventures, HSBC, Singapore, Singapore. 25Department of Computer Science, Czech Technical University in Prague, Prague, Czech 
Republic. 26Archimedes Research Unit on AI, Data Science and Algorithms, Athena Research Center, Marousi, Greece. 27Cognitive Energy Systems 
Department, Applied Systems Technology Division (AST), Fraunhofer Institute of Optronics, System Technologies and Image Exploitation IOSB, Ilmenau, 
Germany. 28Institute of Quantum Technologies, German Aerospace Centre (DLR), Ulm, Germany. 29Institute for Computational Science, University 
of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. 30The Hartree Centre, STFC, Sci-Tech Daresbury, Daresbury, UK. 31Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 32Zuse Institute Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 33Institute for Mathematics, Technische Universität Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany. 34Centre for Quantum Technologies, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. 35Research Institute CODE, University 
of the Bundeswehr Munich, Munich, Germany. 36IBM Quantum, IBM Research Europe — Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. 37Institute for Quantum Computing, 
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada. 38Volkswagen Data:Lab, Volkswagen AG, Munich, Germany.