21 April 2026
POLITECNICO DI TORINO
Repository ISTITUZIONALE
Scheduling of Satellite Constellation Operations in EO Missions Using Quantum Optimization / Marchioli, Vinicius;
Boggio, Mattia; Volpe, Deborah; Massotti, Luca; Novara, Carlo. - ELETTRONICO. - (2024), pp. 227-242. ( OL2A:
International Conference on Optimization, Learning Algorithms and Applications San Cristóbal de La Laguna (SPA) July
24-26, 2024) [10.1007/978-3-031-77432-4_16].
Original
Scheduling of Satellite Constellation Operations in EO Missions Using Quantum Optimization
Springer postprint/Author's Accepted Manuscript
Publisher:
Published
DOI:10.1007/978-3-031-77432-4_16
Terms of use:
Publisher copyright
This version of the article has been accepted for publication, after peer review (when applicable) and is subject to
Springer Nature’s AM terms of use, but is not the Version of Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements,
or any corrections. The Version of Record is available online at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-77432-4_16
(Article begins on next page)
This article is made available under terms and conditions as specified in the  corresponding bibliographic description in
the repository
Availability:
This version is available at: 11583/2996638 since: 2025-01-23T10:52:42Z
Springer Nature

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Scheduling of Satellite Constellation Operations
in EO Missions using Quantum Optimization
Vinicius Marchioli1, Mattia Boggio 1, Deborah Volpe 1, Luca Massotti 2, and
Carlo Novara1
1 Politecnico di Torino, 10124 Turin, Italy
vinicius.marchioli@studenti.polito.it, mattia.boggio@polito.it,
deborah.volpe@polito.it, carlo.novara@polito.it
2 European Space Agency - ESTEC, Noordwijk, The Netherlands
luca.massotti@esa.int
Abstract. As Earth Observation (EO) missions advance towards Ag-
ile Earth Observation Satellites, the complexity of scheduling problems
increases, posing challenges for traditional optimization methods. This
paper investigates the potential of a quantum algorithm to address the
scheduling problem in EO constellations. In particular, a novel formula-
tion of the satellite constellation optimization problem is proposed, trans-
lating it into a Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization (QUBO)
problem, i.e., compliant with quantum solvers. Penalty functions are
incorporated to optimize mission energy consumption. The formulated
QUBO problem is then implemented and solved on a real quantum com-
puter (a D-Wave Quantum Annealer). The performance provided by the
quantum machine is compared with established classical meta-heuristic
solvers like Simulated Annealing and Tabu Search. The results show
that the proposed quantum optimization process achieves better results
in terms of both solution quality and computational efficiency.
Keywords: Quantum optimization · QUBO · Earth Observation mis-
sion · Satellite Constellation Scheduling
1 Introduction
As space exploration becomes increasingly accessible through both private and
governmental entities, Earth Observation (EO) missions have emerged as a criti-
cal area of concern and interest [4,35]. They aid scientific research, particularly in
studying natural phenomena [9,16,28] and climate change dynamics [4,14], and
they may enhance national security by monitoring borders and resources [10].
Over the past decades, the EO missions have seen a significant transformation
moving from long-lasting, multi-functional satellites, such as SPOT, ENVISAT,
and ERS [11], to Agile Earth Observation Satellites (AEOSs). AEOSs are smaller
and more agile satellites, where an extra degree of freedom around the pitch axis
enables the satellites for fast and precise orientation changes in nadir. They oper-
ate in Low Earth Orbits (LEO), often in constellations, and can perform specific

=== PAGE BREAK ===

2 V. Marchioli et al.
(a) AEOS’s enhanced manoeuvrability
around the pitch axis.
(b) Comparison of the observation ca-
pability of EOS and AEOS.
Fig. 1: Agile Earth Observation Satellites (AEOSs).
tasks efficiently [30, 32]. Fig. 1a shows the additional manoeuvrability of these
satellites, while in Fig. 1b the main difference in observation capability between
Non-Agile Earth Observation Satellite (EOS) and AEOS is illustrated. For the
EOS, the specific Observation Time Window (OTW), which is the time period
required for the satellite to observe a specific area on Earth, coincides with its
Visible Time Window (VTW), namely the time period when the target is phys-
ically visible to the satellite’s instruments. In contrast, AEOSs have expanded
observation capabilities, offering multiple feasible OTWs for a single target.
While the agile characteristic greatly improves the observation efficiency and
flexibility of AEOS, it also significantly increases the complexity of the schedul-
ing problem for EO missions. This problem consists of selecting and scheduling
satellite observation tasks to maximize the entire observation profit while satisfy-
ing all the operational constraints. For traditional EOS, the scheduling problem
is relatively straightforward as VTW coincides with OTW. Instead, for AEOS,
each VTW contains multiple potential OTWs, resulting in a considerable expan-
sion in the search space for scheduling observations. This makes the scheduling
problem NP-hard and thus potentially challenging for traditional optimization
methods. Indeed, these approaches may either struggle to find a global solution
or require too long execution times to achieve satisfactory results. The limita-
tions of traditional approaches become even more pronounced when dealing with
constellations of AEOS, namely the case study considered in this paper, where
the complexity of the scheduling problem increases further.
With the rise of quantum technologies, it is becoming clear that quantum
computers have the potential to significantly improve the efficiency and quality
of solutions to complex optimization problems [3, 27]. There are two different
approaches for leveraging quantum computers in the optimization context: gate-
based quantum computing [5] and adiabatic quantum computation (AQC) [2].
In the gate model, the computation is performed by applying a series of unitary
gates to a set of quantum bits (qubits), which can be measured at the end of
the computation, for developing various algorithms including optimization ones.
On the other hand, in AQC, an initial multi-qubit quantum state is prepared
as the ground state of a simple Hamiltonian, followed by an adiabatic time

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Quantum Optimization for EO Satellite Constellation Scheduling 3
evolution that transforms the system into a final Hamiltonian whose ground
state represents the solution of an optimization problem. This paper focuses
on AQC and in particular on the Quantum Annealing (QA) paradigm, which
exploits the adiabatic principle to solve optimization problems [22]. The first
company to develop a real quantum annealer was D-Wave in 2011 [17].
Recent literature has provided substantial demonstrations of the applicabil-
ity of quantum computers and algorithms to address real-world optimization
challenges. For instance, in [23], a D-Wave quantum annealer is used for peptide
and protein design tasks. Furthermore, a novel approach that uses the quantum
annealing paradigm and D-Wave’s machines for optimizing traffic light control
in urban areas was introduced in [21]. Other application domains in which quan-
tum computing has already been exploited include, e.g., machine learning [6],
cryptography [26], finance [24], and logistics [33].
In the realm of aerospace applications, a pioneering work that applies the
quantum paradigm to the scheduling problem of EO missions is [29]. This work
investigates the potential and maturity of then-available quantum computers
for solving a “small-scale” scheduling problem, using a Quadratic Unconstrained
Binary Optimization (QUBO) formulation. A comparative analysis is conducted
between traditional optimization methodologies and a D-Wave 2000Q quantum
annealer. The results show that the quantum annealer can be faster and its
solution quality is comparable for “small” problems, but it degrades for larger
ones due to the limited qubit connectivity and noise issues.
Following the line of [29], the present paper explores the use of a Dwave
quantum annealer, using in particular a Hybrid quantum annealing algorithm
(HQA) [8], for an EO constellation scheduling problem, comparing its perfor-
mance to established classical meta-heuristic solvers like Simulated Annealing
(SA) [19] and Tabu Search (TS) [13]. The HQA is a hybrid classical/quantum
algorithm that implements state-of-the-art classical algorithms with intelligent
allocation of the Dwave Quantum Processing Unit (QPU) to suitable parts of
the problem in order to speed up the execution and enhance solutions for large
problem sizes. In summary, the main contributions of our study are the fol-
lowing: (i) Formulation of the satellite constellation optimization problem and
translation into a QUBO problem. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first work that provides a rigorous and complete formulation of this problem
for a constellation of several satellites. (ii) Integration of penalty functions in
the optimization problem, allowing us to reduce the propellant consumption of
the mission, i.e. extending the lifetime. (iii) Implementation and solution of the
obtained QUBO problem on a real quantum annealer. Note that the implementa-
tion is not trivial since the choice of the annealer setting and related parameters
may be quite complex and/or critical. Moreover, we solve QUBO problems with
a significantly larger number of decision variables than the existing works consid-
ering similar mission planning problems. (iv) Extensive simulations, using a real
D-Wave quantum annealer, and comparison with state-of-the-art QUBO solvers
running on classical computers.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

4 V. Marchioli et al.
(a) Constellation orbits over the globe.
 0°
15°N
30°N
45°NLatitude
 0° 15°E 30°E
Longitude
Orbital projections
 500 mi 
 1000 km 
Satellite 1 ground track
Satellite 2 ground track
Satellite 3 ground track
(b) Orbital projections over Europe
and Africa.
Fig. 2: Example of a three-satellite constellation, characterized by heliosyn-
chronous, highly polar, circular orbits.
This article is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the mathemati-
cal formulation of the constellation scheduling problem. Section 3 presents the
translation of this formulation into a QUBO problem. In section 4, the mission
scenario for the EO scheduling problem is described and a comparative analy-
sis of the results obtained using the quantum annealer and classical solvers is
presented. Finally, the conclusions are drawn in Section 5.
2 Constellation Scheduling Problem
Consider a constellation of NS satellites traveling on different orbits. The three-
satellite constellation, considered in this study and characterized by heliosyn-
chronous, highly polar, circular orbits, is depicted in Figs. 2a and 2b. In par-
ticular, Fig. 2a depicts the S/C orbits over the globe, while Fig. 2b shows the
orbital projections over Europe and Africa. It should be noted that the QUBO
formulation developed in this paper is general and does not depend on the par-
ticular constellation considered. Here, we have chosen to use the SuperView-1
constellation, which consists of Chinese commercial and remote sensing satel-
lites [31]. Although Satellites 2 and 3 share similar orbits, they can be used to
observe different targets, thereby reducing fuel consumption. For more details,
please refer to Section 4.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Quantum Optimization for EO Satellite Constellation Scheduling 5
The orbits are designed in such a way that an arc of each orbit lies above a
given region of the Earth containing NT targets. When a satellite is traveling in
its orbit, it spends a fraction of the orbit period on the arc above the region and,
in this time interval, it can acquire observations/images of the targets. The frac-
tion of the orbit period spent on the arc is called Visible Time Window (VTW).
The orbit arc is divided into smaller segments, corresponding to sub-intervals
of duration ∆T of the VTW. While flying on a segment, a satellite can acquire
observations of a subset of targets. For simplicity, a single orbital revolution is
considered, so that a target may be observed by a satellite no more than once.
The goal is to find an optimal observation scheduling for the satellites of the
constellation. To formalize the optimization problem, the following quantities
are defined:
– S .= {1,...,N S}: Satellite index set. An index j ∈ S indicates the jth
satellite of the constellation.
– T .={1,...,N T}: Target index set. An index i∈T indicates the ith target.
– VTW ji, i∈T, j∈S: Orbit segment index set. VTW ji contains the indices
associated to the orbit segments from which the jth satellite can acquire
an image of the ith target. The indices in VTW ji are ordered by increasing
traveling time.
– wjik∈ R≥0, j∈S, i∈T, k∈VTW ji: Profit associated to a target. wjik is
related to the priority of acquiring an image of the ith target. The priority
may depend on the satellite and the orbit segment.
– ξjik∈{ 0, 1}, j∈ S, i∈ T, k∈ VTW ji: Decision variable. ξjik indicates if
the jth satellite has acquired an image of the ith target while flying in the
orbit segment with index k∈ VTW ji. ξjik = 1 if the acquisition has been
accomplished, ξjik = 0 otherwise.
– n =PNS
j=1
PNT
i=1 card(VTW ji) : Number of decision variables ξjik∈{ 0, 1}.
Note that, in general, n≤NSNT .
– ζ .= (ξj1i1k1,...,ξ jninkn)∈{ 0, 1}n ⊂ Nn×1, j1,...,j n,∈ S, i1,...,i n ∈ T ,
k1∈ VTW j1i1,... kn∈ VTW jnin: Vector containing all the decision vari-
ables. The order in which theξjik’s appear inζ is arbitrary. The one adopted
in this paper is as follows: ijk ∈{ 111, 112,..., 121, 122,..., 211, 212,...,
221, 222,... }. The symbol N denotes the set of natural numbers including 0.
Based on these definitions, the ideal profit of the whole mission is
JP
.=
X
i∈T
X
j∈S
X
k∈VTW ji
wjikξjik.
In this work, we have chosen to make a single acquisition for each target in
order to avoid excessive fuel consumption. This can be imposed by the following
constraints:
X
j∈S
X
k∈VTW ji
ξjik≤ 1,∀i∈T. (1)

=== PAGE BREAK ===

6 V. Marchioli et al.
It must also be taken into account that the observation of two consecutive
targets may be not feasible, since there may be not enough time for a satellite to
maneuver from one acquisition to the subsequent one. The following constraints
avoid to plan unfeasible consecutive observations:
ξji1k1 +ξji2k2≤ 1,∀j∈S,
∀i1,i 2∈T,i 1̸=i2,∀(k1,k 2)∈Fji1i2, (2)
where Fji1i2 is a so-called forbidden maneuver region. This set is defined as
Fji1i2
.={(k1,k 2)∈VTW ji1×VTW ji2 :
τji2k2 <τ ji1k1 +TF},
where τjik is the start time of the ith target acquisition, accomplished by the
jth satellite from the kth orbit segment, and TF is the sum of the duration of
an acquisition and the duration of the maneuver.
In order to penalize acquisitions which require a high attitude adjustment
and thus a high fuel consumption, the following term is introduced:
JC
.=
X
i∈T
X
j∈S
X
k∈VTW ji
λjikξjik.
Finally, we define the objective function
J(ζ) .=−JP +JC,
where ζ .= (ξ111,ξ 112,...,ξ 121,...,ξ 211,...,ξ NS 11,... ).
To sum up, an optimal observation scheduling for the satellites of the con-
stellation can be found by solving the following optimization problem:
ζ∗ = arg min
ζ∈{0,1}n
J(ζ)
subject to :
(i)
X
j∈S
X
k∈VTW ji
ξjik≤ 1,∀i∈T
(ii) ξji1k1 +ξji2k2≤ 1,∀j∈S,
∀i1,i 2∈T,i 1̸=i2,∀(k1,k 2)∈Fji1i2.
(3)
In general, (3) is an Integer Linear Programming (ILP). Due to the discrete
nature of the decision variables, this kind of problem is NP-hard for a classical
computer. Quantum computers and, in particular, quantum annealers have the
potential to significantly reduce the computational complexity of these classes
of problems, finding better solutions with a polynomial speedup compared to
classical computers [3]. A formulation of the optimization problem (3) that is
compliant with quantum annealers is called QUBO (Quadratic Unconstrained
Binary Optimization) and is developed in the next section.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Quantum Optimization for EO Satellite Constellation Scheduling 7
3 QUBO Formulation
In this section, the optimization problem of Equation (3) is formulated according
to the QUBO model [12]. In the QUBO formulation, the objective function is of
the form
H =ζ⊤Qζ, (4)
where Q∈ Rn×n is a matrix of real numbers and ζ ∈ {0, 1}n ⊂ Nn×1 is a
vector of binary variables. This optimization model can consider a constraint
only through an aggregation method. In particular, it is taken into account by
including in the function a quadratic penalty function, assuming a value of 0 for
configurations satisfying the constraints and a positive amount otherwise.
The operations needed to obtain the QUBO formulation (4) of the optimiza-
tion problem (3) are now described in detail.
The function J(ζ) can be written as
J .=−JP +JC
=
X
i∈T
X
j∈S
X
k∈VTW ji
(λjik−wjik)ξjik
=
X
i∈T
X
j∈S
X
k∈VTW ji
(λjik−wjik)ξ2
jik,
where it has been considered ξjik =ξ2
jik,∀j,i,k .
The constraints (1) are translated into the following penalty terms:
ρi
.= 1
2
X
j1,k1,j2,k2
ξj1ik1ξj2ik2,∀i∈T,
for all j1,j 2∈S, k1∈VTW j1i, k2∈VTW j2i, (j2,k 2)̸= (j1,k 1). It can be easy
verified that ρi = 0 if and only if the constraint P
j∈S
P
k∈VTW ji
ξjik ≤ 1 is
satisfied.
In a similar way, the constraints (2) are translated into the following penalty
terms:
ηl
.=ξji1k1ξji2k2,∀j∈S,
∀i1,i 2∈T,i 1̸=i2,∀(k1,k 2)∈Fji1i2,
where l = 1,...,N U and NU is the number of unfeasible maneuvers. Also the
penalties ηl are in the QUBO compatible format, i.e. expressed as a quadratic
penalty function, and give nonzero off-diagonal elements in the Q matrix.
The following objective function can now be defined:
H .=−JP +JC +Λ
 NTX
i=1
ρi +
NUX
l=1
ηl
!
, (5)
where Λ is a positive real number. If Λ is properly sized, the minimizers of H
are solutions of the optimization problem (3). However, its dimensioning is not

=== PAGE BREAK ===

8 V. Marchioli et al.
trivial since its value has to be sufficiently high to penalize invalid solutions
without flattening the problem function too much, avoiding effective solution
space explorations.
While JP represents the ideal profit of the mission, −H gives the profit
adjusted by the penalties. The quantity −H is thus called Practical Profit.
A fundamental observation is thatH is a quadratic function ofζ = (ζ1,...,ζ n).= (ξj1i1k1,...,ξ jninkn), so it is compliant with the QUBO formulation (4). The
construction of the matrix Q is simple and can be accomplished considering
that the coefficients λjik−wjik of J =−JP +JC are on the main diagonal of
Q, whereas the penalty terms ρi and ηl give off-diagonal entries equal to Λ. In
detail, let qαβ, α,β = 1,...,n be the entries of Q. Then, Q is constructed as
follows:
– diag(Q) = (pj1i1k1,...,p jninkn), pjik
.=λjik−wjik.
– qαβ =Λ if, for some i, the term ζαζβ is contained in ρi, or, for some l, it is
contained in ηl.
– qαβ = 0 otherwise.
Once Q has been defined according to these indications, a typical operation
is to make Q symmetric by posing Q := (Q + QT )/2. This operation does not
change the optimization problem and allows us to use QUBO solvers that require
symmetric matrices Q.
The objective function (5) is thus equal to H = ζ⊤Q ζ, and the resulting
optimization is written in the QUBO form
ζ∗ = arg min
ζ∈{0,1}n
ζ⊤Qζ. (6)
For sufficiently large values ofΛ, the solutions of (6) are also solutions of the
optimization problem (3). Similarly to (3), also the optimization problem (6) is
NP-hard for a classical computer. As discussed above, quantum annealers may
overcome the limitations of classical solvers in this context.
3.1 Quantum annealers
Quantum annealers [17, 18] are special-purpose quantum computers suitable
to solve QUBO problems like (6) with a significant computational speedup
(quadratic) compared to classical computers [7,34], possibly improving also the
solution quality. Now, we summarize what is a quantum annealer and how it
works. Defining
σ = (σ1,...,σ n) .= 2ζ−I∈{− 1, 1}n⊂ Zn×1,
the QUBO objective can be written as
H =ζ⊤Qζ = 1
4(σ +I)⊤Q (σ +I) = 1
4σ⊤Qσ + 1
2I⊤Qσ + 1
4 =HF + 1
4.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Quantum Optimization for EO Satellite Constellation Scheduling 9
STRONG TRANSVERSE 
 FIELD
WEAK TRANSVERSE  
FIELD
(a) Spins evolution during an-
nealing. When a strong trans-
verse field is applied, spins are
in a superposition state. Reduc-
ing the transverse field, spins
assume a spin-down or spin-up
state to reach the lowest energy
configuration.
Strong
transverse 
 field
00 01 10 11
00 01 10 11
00 01 10 11
Weak 
transverse
field
(b) Quantum
annealer system
evolution ex-
plained through
a simple hy-
draulic model.
Configurations
Cost/Energy
Simulated
annealing
Quantum
annealing
00...0 11...1
(c) Quantum tunneling vs.
thermal climbing. The first
represents the exploration
mechanism of quantum an-
nealing, while the second
that of simulated anneal-
ing.
Fig. 3: Overview of quantum annealing.
The function HF defined as
HF
.=σ⊤JFσ +hFσ, J F
.= 1
4σ⊤Q, h F
.= 1
2I⊤Q (7)
is called transverse-field Ising Hamiltonian and represents the energy of a physi-
cal system consisting of n interacting particles, described by two-state variables
σi, i = 1,...,n (e.g., spin of electrons, polarization of photons, superconduct-
ing loops, etc.). A Quantum Annealer (QA) is indeed a lattice of n interacting
nodes, called qubits, described by two-state variables, which obey the laws of
quantum mechanics. They are physically implemented by means of supercon-
ducting loops [15, 17]. While a bit of a classical computer is allowed to be in
one of two possible states, a qubit can be in a superposition of both states si-
multaneously. This property, peculiar of quantum systems, enables the so-called
quantum parallelism, where the computer can explore simultaneously multiple
solutions of a problem, unlike classical computers that explore only one solu-
tion at a time. Such a parallelism is one of the key features of QAs. Another
important feature is quantum tunneling, which allows the computer to bypass
energy barriers, thus reducing the issue of trapping in local solutions, as shown
in Fig. 3c. The main steps accomplished by a QA to solve a QUBO-like problem
are as follows.
Quantum Annealing Process
1. Initialization: The QA system is initialized in a superposition of states, repre-
senting all the possible configurations of the optimization problem. It means
that each qubit is in a superposition of its basis state 0 and 1. The cor-
responding initial Hamiltonian is denoted by HI. This can be graphically
represented by the spins aligned on the x-axis of Fig. 3a or by the flat bot-
tom of the tank in the hydraulic model usually exploited for explaining QA
system evolution of Fig. 3b.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

10 V. Marchioli et al.
2. Adiabatic evolution: The Hamiltonian is continuously modified from HI,
whose ground state is easily configured as initial state, to the final Hamil-
tonian HF in (7), which encodes the optimization problem. The evolu-
tion is controlled in an adiabatic manner, in such a way that the QA re-
mains in the ground state during the whole process, also avoiding local min-
ima thanks to quantum tunneling. The evolution is described by HQA =
φ(t)HI + (1−φ(t))HF , where HQA is the QA Hamiltonian and φ(t) is a
continuous function of time such thatφ(0) = 1 andφ(TA) = 0, beingTA > 0
called the annealing time. This can be graphically represented in Fig. 3b with
the hydraulic model as a gradual deformation of the tank’s bottom for de-
scribing the objective function, and the water begins to flow towards the
lowest points. Alternatively, it can be represented as spins of 3a which start
to modify their orientation to assume the lowest energy configuration.
3. Measurement: Once the evolution process is complete, the final spin vector
σ∗ is measured. This vector corresponds to a minimum of the Hamiltonian
which, at the end of the process, isHF =H−1/4. It follows that the solution
of the QUBO problem (6) is ζ∗ = (σ∗ +I)/2.
4. Post-processing: The obtained solution might not be perfect due to noise and
defects in the quantum hardware. Post-processing techniques like classical
optimization algorithms can be used to refine the solution (e.g., simulated
annealing or tabu search).
5. Repetitions: The whole procedure (steps 1 - 4) can be repeated several times
and the best result is selected. 2
After the initialization step, the system is a superposition condition, guaran-
teeing a simultaneous and parallel exploration of the solution space, giving an
exponential speedup with respect to a classical computer, where the solutions
must be explored one at a time. However, the evolution from the initial to the
final Hamiltonian cannot be arbitrarily fast. The Adiabatic Theorem states that
a quantum system starting from a ground state persists in a ground state, pro-
vided that the change in time of the Hamiltonian is sufficiently slow. Let TA be
the annealing time, i.e., the time taken to change the Hamiltonian from HI to
HF . According to the Adiabatic Theorem, the ground state is maintained during
the change if
TA≥ 1
mint∈[0,TA]∆E(t)2 , (8)
where ∆E is the gap between the two lowest energy levels of the QA. The
combination of the exponential speedup in the initialization step and the limit
imposed by the Adiabatic Theorem yield in any case a significant computational
complexity reduction with respect to classical computers. Indeed, despite it is
notoriously difficult to analyze the runtime of adiabatic optimization algorithms,
several works in the literature show that a quadratic speedup with respect to
classical computers can be guaranteed [7,34].
If inequality (8) is not satisfied, there is a non-null probability for the QA to
jump from the lowest energy level to the second lowest level, or even to higher

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Quantum Optimization for EO Satellite Constellation Scheduling 11
Table 1: OE for the satellite constellation.
ID a (km) i ( °) Ω (°) e ω (°) ν (°)
1000 6903.67 97.58 97.85 16 .55e−4 130.99 2.03
2000 6909.06 97.58 93.20 9 .97e−4 254.46 155.23
3000 6898.60 97.58 92.36 14 .60e−10 276.73 140.19
energy levels, which correspond to sub-optimal solutions of the optimization
problem. This gives rise to a trade-off between computational speed and quality
of the solution: sub-optimal solutions can be found, which require a shorter an-
nealing time with respect to an optimal solution but are satisfactory in practice.
A leading company in the field of QAs is D-Wave Systems [1], which is
developing QAs with a growing number of qubits (more than 5000), enabling
the solution of increasingly complex optimization problems. Quantum annealing
is still an evolving technology, and there are ongoing efforts worldwide to improve
its performance and reliability.
4 Simulation Results
In this section, the proposed quantum algorithm is validated and compared
with the following classical meta-heuristic algorithms: Tabu Search (TS) [13]
and Simulated Annealing (SA) [19]. Firstly, the mission scenario for the EO
scheduling problem is described in detail. Then, a comprehensive analysis of the
results obtained considering both quantum and classical algorithms is reported.
4.1 Mission scenario description
The scenario considered in this paper for the EO scheduling problem is shown
in Fig. 4a. It includes a list of all the European capitals and many UNESCO
Natural World Heritage sites. The main characteristics of the scenario are shown
below:
1. Number of decision variables: 1471.
2. Number of unique targets: 55.
3. Constraint density: 22.51%.
To accomplish this mission, three satellites have been taken into account.
Their parameters, presented in Table 1, are based on the well-documented
SuperView-1 constellation consisting of Chinese commercial and remote sensing
satellites [31], launched in 2018. Their agile nature allows to perform maneuvers
in the roll and pitch directions, with a range of ±45°, for both angles.
The first column shows the unique ID of the S/Cs, while the OE are presented
from columns 2 to 7, respectively: semi-major axisa, inclinationi, right ascension
of the ascending nodeΩ, eccentricitye, argument of perigeeω and mean anomaly
ν. From the original specifications, the orbital elements (OE) for satellite 1, with
ID 1000, is slightly modified to fit the generated data requirements for sparsity.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

12 V. Marchioli et al.
These OE account for heliosynchronous, highly polar and almost circular orbits.
One orbital revolution for the constellation is around 95 minutes.
The chosen profit, from 1 to 5, and duration are arbitrarily selected to be
as generic as possible while still preserving the realistic nature of the problem.
Alongside the ground tracks, two auxiliary roll lines, computed during the pre-
treatment phase, are plotted, providing a good visual indication of each satellite’s
line-of-sight reach (as can be seen in Fig. 4a). In practice, the down-sampled data
are used for the problem formulation, considerably reducing the number of vari-
ables, but still maintaining the system’s physical characteristics and real-world
applicability [31]. Some authors prefer a finer resolution [25], while others [20]
opt for an even larger time step. It should be noted that this scenario consists
of a high-density dataset due to the close vicinity and the number of targets.
Indeed, satellites two and three may observe more than 30 targets in less than 10
minutes with many overlapping VTWs. Consequently, the resulting Q matrix
is highly dense, making the problem hard to solve, especially with QA, as it
requires more physical qubits to embed the variable relations.
4.2 Results comparison
The tests conducted in this study involved the implementation of the proposed
strategies using Matlab for QUBO formulation. Then, depending on the strat-
egy used, these QUBO problems were solved using different solvers provided
by D-Wave. In particular: i) the D-Wave Leap Hybrid Sampler for the HQA,
ii) the D-Wave SimulatedAnnealingSampler for the SA, and iii) the D-Wave
TabuSampler for the TS.
Note that, before deciding to use the HQA, we carefully compared it with
pure QA, finding that nowadays the latter is not able to produce satisfactory
solutions for large-scale problems. This is due to the known problems of quantum
hardware, such as environmental noise, a limited number of physical qubits, and
intricate problem-embedding strategies.
To evaluate the performance, the algorithms under consideration were exe-
cuted 100 times in order to obtain a comparative distribution. The metrics used
for the comparison are: i) the mean value of the Practical Profit −H (Mean
Pract. Profit −H), ii) its standard deviation (SD Pract. Profit −H), iii) the
mean value of the Runtime (Mean Runtime), and iii) its standard deviation (SD
Runtime).
Taking into account the characteristics of the scenario described in Section
4.1, it can be observed that, although the targets across Europe are densely
geographically distributed, the resulting matrix exhibits only around 22% con-
straint density. Nevertheless, as the number of decision variables increases, the
complexity of solving the problem escalates considerably. Indeed, classical solvers
experience a decline in performance, highlighting the efficacy of adopting the hy-
brid quantum approach. Considering the best outcome of the 100 executions of
the HQA, a maximum Practical Profit of 103 .33 was obtained with 40 unique
targets captured. This result is visually depicted in Fig. 4b.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Quantum Optimization for EO Satellite Constellation Scheduling 13
30°S
 0°
30°N
60°NLatitude
30°W  0° 30°E
Longitude
Targets over local projection
 1000 mi 
 2000 km 
Targets
Satellite 1 ground track
Max and min line of sight
Satellite 2 ground track
Max and min line of sight
Satellite 3 ground track
Max and min line of sight
(a) Target disposition and constellation
ground tracks over local projection.
30°S
 0°
30°N
60°NLatitude
30°W  0° 30°E 60°E
Longitude
Mission results with HQA. Profit = 103.3334
 1000 mi 
 2000 km 
Targets
Satellite 1 ground track
Satellite 2 ground track
Satellite 3 ground track
Satellite 1 captured targets
Satellite 2 captured targets
Satellite 3 captured targets
(b) Captured targets over Europe and
Africa with HQA.
Fig. 4: EO scheduling problem.
Table 2 collects the mean results of all the 100 executions of the three algo-
rithms, based on the metrics previously described. All the methods yield viable
and feasible mission results with comparable Practical Profit−H and, most im-
portantly, without any constraint violation. However a clear advantage of the
HQA can be noted in terms of runtime. On average, it is 1 .6 times faster than
TS and 6 times faster than SA. Additionally, from the outcomes of the 100 mis-
sion, a comparative distribution is presented in Fig. 5. The HQA outperforms
its classical counterparts not only in terms of mean values but also by yielding
a lower standard deviation, with more reliable results. These remarkable results
were obtained using around 40 ms of QPU access time with respect to the 4
s of total runtime, showing the effectiveness of combining the classical meta-
heuristics with quantum methods. It should be noted that, ideally, increasing
the number of reads can improve the quality of optimal solutions obtained with
Table 2: Comparison between classic and hybrid quantum algorithms.
Mean Pract. Profit −H SD Pract. Profit −H Mean Runtime (s) SD Runtime (s)
TS 90.76 1.07 6.96 1.31
SA 99.23 0.74 25.46 2.83
HQA 101.94 0.37 4.0140 0.0038

=== PAGE BREAK ===

14 V. Marchioli et al.
classical solvers. However, this approach may not be feasible for real-time satel-
lite scheduling due to the time constraints involved. Additionally, it leads to an
increase in the standard deviation of the associated profit, negatively impacting
overall solution precision.
Fig. 5: Results distribution for 100 runs.
5 Conclusions
In conclusion, this paper introduces a novel QUBO formulation for the AEOSs
scheduling problem. This formulation has been implemented onto the real Dwave
quantum computer using the HQA approach and compared with classical op-
timization solvers, such as SA and TS. The obtained results show improved
performance in terms of both quality of the solutions and computational time,
suggesting that hybrid techniques are ready to be used in real and scalable mis-
sion scenarios
The proposed formulation could be further improved by relaxing model con-
straints for broader applicability and introducing an integer-valued unicity con-
straint that allows multiple target acquisitions. Additionally, despite the in-
creased in complexity, the solver could potentially handle a one-day scheduling
horizon, effectively simulating real missions. Finally, a reconfigurable model for
movable targets could optimize both orbital adjustments and target acquisition.
It is important to note that the current quantum devices are limited in terms of
number of qubits availability, connectivity and fidelity. These limitations neces-
sitate the use of hybrid solvers for contemporary industrial applications. Despite
these challenges, the results obtained are encouraging. They demonstrate that
exploring quantum solutions can provide valuable insights for the future of real-
time satellite scheduling research.
Acknowledgement. We would like to thank D-Wave Systems for providing
access to their quantum annealer through the free monthly user program.

=== PAGE BREAK ===

Quantum Optimization for EO Satellite Constellation Scheduling 15
References
1. D-wave systems. https://www.dwavesys.com/
2. Albash, T., Lidar, D.A.: Adiabatic quantum computation. Rev. Mod. Phys. 90,
015002 (Jan 2018)
3. Albash, T., Lidar, D.A.: Demonstration of a scaling advantage for a quantum
annealer over simulated annealing. Physical Review X 8(3), 031016 (2018)
4. Anderson, K., Ryan, B., Sonntag, W., Kavvada, A., Friedl, L.: Earth observation
in service of the 2030 agenda for sustainable development. Geo-spatial Information
Science 20(2), 77–96 (2017)
5. Barenco, A., Bennett, C.H., Cleve, R., DiVincenzo, D.P., Margolus, N., Shor, P.,
Sleator, T., Smolin, J.A., Weinfurter, H.: Elementary gates for quantum computa-
tion. Phys. Rev. A 52, 3457–3467 (Nov 1995)
6. Biamonte, J., Wittek, P., Pancotti, N., Rebentrost, P., Wiebe, N., Lloyd, S.: Quan-
tum machine learning. Nature 549(7671), 195–202 (2017)
7. Boixo, S., Ortiz, G., Somma, R.: Fast quantum methods for optimization. The
European Physical Journal Special Topics 224(1), 35–49 (2015)
8. Booth, M., Reinhardt, S.P., Roy, A.: Partitioning optimization problems for hybrid
classical/quantum execution. Technical Report pp. 01–09 (2017)
9. Chuvieco, E., Mouillot, F., van der Werf, G.R., San Miguel, J., Tanase, M., Kout-
sias, N., Garc´ ıa, M., Yebra, M., Padilla, M., Gitas, I., Heil, A., Hawbaker, T.J.,
Giglio, L.: Historical background and current developments for mapping burned
area from satellite earth observation. Remote Sensing of Environment 225, 45–64
(2019)
10. Dolce, F., Di Domizio, D., Bruckert, D., Rodr´ ıguez, A., Patrono, A.: Earth Ob-
servation for Security and Defense, pp. 705–731. Springer International Publishing
(2020)
11. Dubock, P.A., Spoto, F., Simpson, J., Spencer, D., Schutte, E., Sontag, H.: The
Envisat satellite and its integration. ESA Bulletin 106, 26–45 (Jun 2001)
12. Glover, F., Kochenberger, G., Du, Y.: Quantum Bridge Analytics I: a tutorial on
formulating and using QUBO models. 4OR 17(4), 335–371 (12 2019)
13. Glover, F., Laguna, M.: Tabu search. Springer (1998)
14. Guo, H.D., Zhang, L., Zhu, L.W.: Earth observation big data for climate change
research. Advances in Climate Change Research 6(2), 108–117 (2015), special issue
on advances in Future Earth research
15. Hauke, P., Katzgraber, H.G., Lechner, W., Nishimori, H., Oliver, W.D.: Perspec-
tives of quantum annealing: Methods and implementations. Reports on Progress
in Physics 83(5), 054401 (2020)
16. Hirschmugl, M., Gallaun, H., Dees, M., Datta, P., Deutscher, J., Koutsias, N.,
Schardt, M.: Methods for mapping forest disturbance and degradation from optical
earth observation data: A review. Current Forestry Reports 3, 32–45 (2017)
17. Johnson, M.W., Amin, M.H., Gildert, S., Lanting, T., Hamze, F., Dickson, N.,
Harris, R., Berkley, A.J., Johansson, J., Bunyk, P., et al.: Quantum annealing
with manufactured spins. Nature 473(7346), 194–198 (2011)
18. Kadowaki, T., Nishimori, H.: Quantum annealing in the transverse ising model.
Physical Review E 58(5), 5355 (1998)
19. Kirkpatrick, S., Gelatt, C.D., Vecchi, M.P.: Optimization by simulated annealing.
Science 220(4598), 671–680 (1983)
20. Liu, X., Laporte, G., Chen, Y., He, R.: An adaptive large neighborhood search
metaheuristic for agile satellite scheduling with time-dependent transition time.
Computers & Operations Research 86, 41–53 (2017)

=== PAGE BREAK ===

16 V. Marchioli et al.
21. Marchesin, A., Montrucchio, B., Graziano, M., Boella, A., Mondo, G.: Improving
urban traffic mobility via a versatile quantum annealing model. IEEE Transactions
on Quantum Engineering 4, 1–13 (2023)
22. Morita, S., Nishimori, H.: Mathematical foundation of quantum annealing. Journal
of Mathematical Physics 49(12), 125210 (12 2008)
23. Mulligan, V.K., Melo, H., Merritt, H.I., Slocum, S., Weitzner, B.D., Watkins, A.M.,
Renfrew, P.D., Pelissier, C., Arora, P.S., Bonneau, R.: Designing peptides on a
quantum computer. bioRxiv (2020)
24. Or´ us, R., Mugel, S., Lizaso, E.: Quantum computing for finance: Overview and
prospects. Reviews in Physics 4, 100028 (2019)
25. Peng, G., Song, G., Xing, L., Gunawan, A., Vansteenwegen, P.: An exact algo-
rithm for agile earth observation satellite scheduling with time-dependent profits.
Computers & Operations Research 120, 104946 (03 2020)
26. Pirandola, S., Andersen, U.L., Banchi, L., Berta, M., Bunandar, D., Colbeck, R.,
Englund, D., Gehring, T., Lupo, C., Ottaviani, C., Pereira, J.L., Razavi, M., Shaari,
J.S., Tomamichel, M., Usenko, V.C., Vallone, G., Villoresi, P., Wallden, P.: Ad-
vances in quantum cryptography. Adv. Opt. Photon. 12(4), 1012–1236 (Dec 2020)
27. Roland, J., Cerf, N.J.: Quantum search by local adiabatic evolution. Physical Re-
view A 65(4) (Mar 2002)
28. Ruf, C., Unwin, M., Dickinson, J., Rose, R., Rose, D., Vincent, M., Lyons, A.:
Cygnss: Enabling the future of hurricane prediction [remote sensing satellites].
IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Magazine 1(2), 52–67 (2013)
29. Stollenwerk, T., Michaud, V., Lobe, E., Picard, M., Basermann, A., Botter, T.:
Agile earth observation satellite scheduling with a quantum annealer. IEEE Trans-
actions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems 57(5), 3520–3528 (2021)
30. Verfaillie, G., Lemaˆ ıtre, M.: Selecting and scheduling observations for agile satel-
lites: Some lessons from the constraint reasoning community point of view. In:
Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming - CP. pp. 670–684 (11 2001)
31. Wang, X., Han, C., Zhang, R., Gu, Y.: Scheduling multiple agile earth observation
satellites for oversubscribed targets using complex networks theory. IEEE Access
7, 110605–110615 (2019)
32. Wang, X., Wu, G., Xing, L., Pedrycz, W.: Agile earth observation satellite schedul-
ing over 20 years: Formulations, methods, and future directions. IEEE Systems
Journal 15(3), 3881–3892 (09 2021)
33. Yarkoni, S., Huck, A., Sch¨ ulldorf, H., Speitkamp, B., Tabrizi, M.S., Leib, M., B¨ ack,
T., Neukart, F.: Solving the shipment rerouting problem with quantum optimiza-
tion techniques. In: Mes, M., Lalla-Ruiz, E., Voß, S. (eds.) Computational Logistics.
pp. 502–517. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2021)
34. Zanca, T., Santoro, G.E.: Quantum annealing speedup over simulated annealing
on random ising chains. Phys. Rev. B 93, 224431 (Jun 2016)
35. Zhao, Q., Yu, L., Du, Z., Peng, D., Hao, P., Zhang, Y., Gong, P.: An overview
of the applications of earth observation satellite data: Impacts and future trends.
Remote Sensing 14(8) (2022)