SOLVINGDISTRIBUTEDFLEXIBLEJOBSHOPSCHEDULING
PROBLEMS IN THEWOOLTEXTILEINDUSTRY WITHQUANTUM
ANNEALING
Lilia Toma
Databases and Information Systems
FernUniversit¨at in Hagen
58097 Hagen, Germany
tomalilia@yahoo.com
Markus Zajac
Databases and Information Systems
FernUniversit¨at in Hagen
58097 Hagen, Germany
markus.zajac@fernuni-hagen.de
Uta St ¨orl
Databases and Information Systems
FernUniversit¨at in Hagen
58097 Hagen, Germany
uta.stoerl@fernuni-hagen.de
January 15, 2026
ABSTRACT
Many modern manufacturing companies have evolved from a single production facility to a multi-
factory production environment that must manage both regionally dispersed production orders and
their multi-site production steps. The availability of a range of machines in different locations ca-
pable of performing the same operation and shipping times between factories have transformed
planning systems from the classic Job Shop Scheduling Problem (JSSP) to the Distributed Flexible
Job Shop Scheduling Problem (DFJSP). Consequently, the complexity of production planning has
increased significantly. We employ Quantum Annealing (QA) to solve the DFJSP in our research.
In addition to assigning production orders to production sites, production steps are also assigned
to these sites. This requirement is based on a real use case of a wool textile manufacturing com-
pany. To investigate the applicability of this method to large problem instances, problems ranging
from 50 variables up to 250 variables, the largest problem that could be embedded into a D-Wave
quantum annealer Quantum Processing Unit (QPU), are formulated and solved. Special attention
is dedicated to determining the Lagrange parameters of the Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Opti-
mization (QUBO) model and the QPU configuration parameters, as these factors can significantly
impact solution quality. The obtained solutions are compared to solutions obtained by Simulated
Annealing (SA), both in terms of solution quality and calculation time. The results demonstrate that
QA has the potential to solve large problem instances specific to the industry.
KeywordsQuantum annealing·simulated annealing·DFJSP·production planning
1 Introduction
This paper is based on a use case of a textile manufacturing company that operates in the worsted yarn industry,
specializing in pure wool and wool blends for weaving, flat and circular knitting, as well as luxury and non-apparel
markets. This business-to-business company has production sites in several countries on different continents. Produc-
tion sites in different locations perform only specific production steps and work together in sequence-dependent setups
to fulfill each individual sales order. For this purpose, sales orders are first converted into production orders, which
must be assigned to the various production sites for processing through different production steps. Given the scatter-
arXiv:2403.06699v3  [quant-ph]  14 Jan 2026

=== PAGE BREAK ===

APREPRINT- JANUARY15, 2026
ing of production sites that may be involved in processing a single production order, thorough production planning is
crucial.
The reason is that this production planning problem is an NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem, which can be
reduced to the Distributed Flexible Job Shop Scheduling Problem (DFJSP) in this use case. It is widely known as one
of the most difficult combinatorial optimization problems [16]. At the same time, operational production planning
requires continuous and process-parallel optimization of machine allocation and processing sequence.
Quantum annealing (QA) is a promising technology to solve combinatorial optimization problems. While gate-based
quantum computers can handle a broader range of problems, quantum annealers are specifically designed to solve
combinatorial optimization problems commonly encountered in industry [36]. In this work, we use theAdvantage
System 4.1quantum annealer from D-Wave to solve the DFJSP.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no other work that explicitly addresses solving the DFJSP using QA. Our three
contributions are as follows:
1. We use a QA to solve the DFJSP. Due to the specifics of the wool textile industry, we also extend the
DFJSP and make it even more complex: The classical DFJSP is extended to not only consider the distribution
of production orders, but also the distribution of production steps (of a production order). Shipping times
between production steps at different sites must also be included in the model. To the best of our knowledge,
there is no other work in the literature that discusses the solution of the classical or the extended DFJSP with
QA.
2. Calculation ofLagrange parametersand QPU configuration parameters. The values of the so-called Lagrange
parameters of the QUBO model and the QPU configuration parameters have a significant influence on the
solution quality. Instead of the trial-and-error method, as some approaches suggest 1, we determine these
parameters based on the mathematical formulation of the problem.
3. Assessment from an economic perspective. We address the question of whether the use of QA can lead to a
speed advantage for the DFJSP with distributed operations specific to the wool textile industry.
This paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we review the state of the art on optimization problems and quantum
annealing, before we discuss related work in Section 3. We describe our QUBO model to solve the extended DFJSP
in Section 4. Based on the QUBO model, we describe and discuss our experiments in Section 5. Section 6 provides a
summary.
2 Preliminaries
In Subsection 2.1, we initially study computationally complex combinatorial optimization problems that are typical
in production planning. We then turn to the topic of quantum annealing in Subsection 2.2 and to simulated annealing
in Subsection 2.3. The connection between the Binary Quadratic Model (BQM) / Quadratic Unconstrained Binary
Optimization (QUBO) and QA is highlighted in Subsection 2.4.
2.1 Combinatorial Optimization Problems
The Job Shop Scheduling Problem (JSSP) is a combinatorial optimization problem 2 where a given set of jobs (or
production orders) must be executed. At the same time, only a limited number of machines can perform the operations
required for the jobs (also referred to as production steps). Each operation can be executed by a specific machine. A
schedule must be found that determines which jobs are to be executed at which time and by which machine. The aim
is to minimize the total amount of time until all jobs have been completed [5, 1]. Many variations of the JSSP problem
exist. To be closer to both the market and manufacturing resources, modern enterprises have evolved from a single
factory to a multi-factory manufacturing environment. This has led to the scheduling system changing from a JSSP
system to a Flexible Job Shop Scheduling Problem (FJSP) and further to a Distributed Flexible Job Shop Scheduling
Problem (DFJSP).
The FJSP is a generalization of the JSSP that allows tasks to be processed on one machine, chosen from a set of
alternative machines (the machines in each set are identical) [21]. As is well known, this is a strongly NP-hard
problem [39]. A distinctive feature of JSSP (and FJSP) is the parallel job processing. While different process chains
1Programming the D-Wave QPU [White Paper]:https://www.dwavesys.com/media/qvbjrzgg/guide-2.pdf
2Combinatorial optimization is the search process for maxima (or minima) of an objective function where the domain has a
discrete but large configuration space.
2

=== PAGE BREAK ===

APREPRINT- JANUARY15, 2026
for an order are evaluated, the selection of a process chain for an order influences the choice of production routes for
all other orders.
The DFJSP refers to production activities that are carried out by several geographically distributed factories. The
DFJSP can be regarded as an extension of FJSP, which also includes the selection of appropriate factories for the
jobs [14]. The DFJSP described in the literature implies that if a job is assigned to a factory, then all the operations of
this job must be processed at the same factory [14, 16]. The wool textile industry is a special case of DFJSP, where
a job’s operation can be processed in different locations. Assigning specific operations to different factories results in
unique production schedules for the jobs, which influences the production planning. The DFJSP is more complex than
FJSP and is also classified as NP-Hard in complexity theory [16]. The goal of scheduling is to assign each operation
to factories and machines, considering the shipping time between locations, and launching operations on machines in
a way that minimizes the makespan of all operations, thus ensuring that all jobs are completed in the shortest time
possible.
2.2 Quantum Annealing
Today, two main architectures for quantum computers exist: gate-based quantum computers and QA [5]. Gate-based
quantum computers use quantum gates to perform calculations, analogous to Boolean gates in classical computers.
These processors are not yet fault-tolerant or large enough to achieve quantum supremacy, a state referred to as the
Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) era [4]. Consequently, it is difficult to develop practical applications on
gate-based quantum computers at present.
On the other hand, QA devices, such as the computer developed by D-Wave, map a problem to a mathematical model
of interacting magnets and then search for an optimal solution for problems with a large solution space. Si et al. [27]
developed a large-scale and energy-efficient superparamagnetic Ising quantum annealer, which advances the scope of
coherent Ising devices for combinatorial optimization. In general, QA is a mechanical metaheuristic to solve problems
with a large, but discrete, search space.
QA systems are initialized in a low-energy state. The problem parameters are changed slowly enough, which allows
the system to end in a low-energy state of the problem that corresponds to an optimal solution [36]. The evolution of
the system can be represented by a time-dependent Hamiltonian3:
Hising =− A(s)
2
 X
i
ˆσ(i)
x
!
| {z }
Initial Hamiltonian
+B(s)
2

X
i
hi ˆσ(i)
z +
X
i>j
Ji,j ˆσ(i)
z ˆσ(j)
z


| {z }
Final Hamiltonian
(1)
whereAandBare time-dependent coefficients,sis the annealing time rescaled to take values between0and1,ˆσ (i)
x,z
are the Pauli Matrices4 of operations on a qubitq i,h i is the qubit bias, andJ i,j the coupling strength between qubits.
The algorithm gradually transitions in time from the initial ground state of theInitial Hamiltonianto a state described
by theFinal Hamiltonian[25]. The Final Hamiltonian matches the energy function to be minimized, and represents
the best solution at its minimum value.
2.3 Simulated Annealing
Simulated Annealing (SA) is a nature-inspired stochastic metaheuristic, single solution-based algorithm used to find a
global optimum in a large problem space [29], and can be seen as a classical computing pendant to QA. Fig. 1 shows
a comparison between QA and SA.
In SA, to simulate the annealing process, a temperature variable is set high, and then the system is allowed to cool
while the algorithm runs. SA is using thermal effects to converge to a low energy state, but therefore needs to jump
over higher energy barriers. On the other hand, QA uses the quantum tunneling effect 5, which allows it to potentially
surpass this higher barrier directly and thus reach the minimum faster [6]. Recent advancements in QA methods have
suggested potential benefits by employing QA over SA to address NP-hard optimization challenges [18].
3See also Carugno et al. [5] andhttps://docs.dwavequantum.com/en/latest/quantum_research/quantum_
annealing_intro.htmlfor the Hamiltonian term.
4In quantum mechanics, Pauli Matrices are a set of 2 × 2 complex Hermitian and unitary matrices that arise in Pauli’s treatment
of spins.
5In quantum mechanics, the tunneling effect describes the penetration of particles through barriers, even if the particle’s energy
is less than the barrier height.
3

=== PAGE BREAK ===

APREPRINT- JANUARY15, 2026
Figure 1: Quantum Annealing versus Simulated Annealing (Source: authors, based on Venkateswaran [32]).
2.4 Binary Quadratic Models
For QA, cost functions are mathematical expressions that are usually formulated as binary quadratic models 6 and
whose lowest values generally represent the best solutions to problems [36, 38]. To solve problems on the D-Wave
quantum annealer, the problem space has to be formulated as a BQM, the D-Wave Systems software representation of
the objective function [38]:
HIsing (s) =
X
i∈V
hisi +
X
(ij)∈E
Jijsisj, si∈{−1,1}(2)
HQUBO(x) =
X
i∈V
aixi +
X
(ij)∈E
bijxixj, xi∈{0,1}(3)
wheres i andx i are binary variables, i.e., categorical variables that can only take one of two values.s i is the decision
variable called spin that can take values from the set{-1,1}, in which case the problem is called an Ising problem
(Eq. 2) [15]. In the Ising model,h i is the magnetic field that represents the linear coefficients corresponding to qubit
biases andJ i,j represents the coupling or interaction strength between qubits [38, 36]. In a QUBO problem (Eq. 3),
xi can take values from the set{0,1}[13]. Qubit biases are represented by the linear coefficientsa i and the coupling
strength between qubits by the quadratic coefficientsb i,j [30]. Both versions are NP-hard and can easily be converted
into each other by applying variable substitution [30, 34]. In this paper, the QUBO format is used to formulate the
problem. This is because QUBO formulations are a widely used method for this [9].
The QUBO formulation is further mapped to a QPU topology [36] to solve the problem during the annealing process
and minimize the energy function. QA devices are less affected by noise than gate model quantum computers. This
allows for more qubit usage and thus solves larger problems. QA provides an approach that promises good solutions
to NP-hard problems and specializes in combinatorial optimization. While the discussion continues whether QA can
provide quantum speed-up over classical approaches, there have been several attempts to solve application-motivated
problems with QA [36].
6https://docs.dwavequantum.com/en/latest/quantum_research/qubo_ising.html
4

=== PAGE BREAK ===

APREPRINT- JANUARY15, 2026
3 Related Work
In this Section, we assess previous approaches to solving the optimization problems described in Subsection 2.1.
JSSP.In the past, a variety of approaches to solve the JSSP or its variation existed. Denkena et al. [7] mention heuris-
tics, Genetic Algorithm (GA), Tabu Search, Ant Colony, Particle Swarm Optimization and SA. These approaches are
used both individually and in hybrid combinations with one another. Venturelli et al. [33] present a solver for the JSSP
that makes use of a QA. Carugno et al. [5] studied the application of QA to solve JSSP and discussed challenges
related to problem formulation for the fine-tuning of the QA. In terms of solution quality, QA is remarkably effective
in comparison to classical approaches on very constrained problem instances, while closely competitive on realistic
problem instances. Pakhomchik et al. [22] focus on the mathematical formulation of JSSP and propose a new large
neighborhood search approach, with good empirical results for large problem instances.
Zielewski et al. [40] use QA to solve JSSP and especially investigate the embedding process in the performance.
The authors demonstrate that the initial setup of the problem, post-processing, and problem formulation, as well as
the presence of excess variables and large embeddings, have a significant impact on the results. A. Sharma and P.
Maharjan [2] compare QA to SA through existing published works and conclude that QA has the potential to be
considered as an optimized technique against SA. QA is more efficient than SA in estimating the ground state of the
system for simulations of small and large sample sizes. Denchev et al. [6] show that, for problems where local minima
is separated by tall and narrow energy barriers, QA is more than10
8
times faster than SA running on a single core. Wei
et al. [35] introduce a hybrid quantum-classical Benders’ decomposition for federated learning scheduling, reducing
iteration counts by 70.3% and computation time by 81%. Smierzchalski et al. [28] show that a hybrid quantum-
classical computation scheme can be efficiently used for automatic guided vehicle scheduling in manufacturing.
In general, research considering transportation time focuses on the flow shop scheduling problem 7 or classical FJSP.
Most of the QA research in this field focuses on solving JSSP or FJSP, and transportation time is often neglected in the
literature. However, transportation time between locations can have a significant impact on the maximum completion
time of FJSP.
FSP.Flow Shop Scheduling Problem (FSP) is one of the most studied problems in order planning. Hurink and
Knust [10] apply SA to minimize both the total completion time and the total tardiness of flow shop problems. Naderi
et al. [19] propose an adaptation of the SA algorithm to solve the flow shop problem with incorporated sequence-
dependent transportation times with a single-transporter. Several heuristic algorithms were developed considering
the transportation of an interrupted job from one machine to another. Naderi et al. [20] consider the transportation
times in permutation flow shops and provide solution methods that include heuristics and metaheuristics to solve large
problems. An adaptation of the imperialist competitive algorithm, hybridized with a simulated annealing-based local
search, was proposed by Karimi et al. [12] to solve the problem.
FJSP.Schworm et al. [25] investigate a QA-based FJSP on large problem instances specific to modern manufacturing
and demonstrate the efficiency of the approach regarding scalability, solutions’ quality, and computing time. Denkena
et al. [7] compare the computing time of several approaches to solve the classical FJSP and conclude that it generally
increases significantly with the size of the problem. Their research suggests that these methods deliver valid results for
small problem instances, but are not suitable for problem sizes relevant to practical applications. Therefore, methods
are required that yield high-quality outcomes while also ensuring consistently quick computation times, particularly for
large problem instances. The paper also investigates the concept of QA- based optimization for a process-parallel FJSP
on existing benchmarks. The results reveal that the QA technique consistently achieves low anneal times, especially
for large instances, while still producing outcomes comparable to those of classical heuristics. Recent work by Fu
et al. [8] solves the FJSP using a Coherent Ising Machine (CIM) and shows an 80% improvement compared to classical
methods, but only for small instances, due to existing hardware constraints. INOUE et al. [11] analyzed the FJSP with
Tool Switching Constraints with the Constrained Quadratic Model (CQM) solver supported by the D-Wave Leap
Hybrid Solver and showed that the quality and computation time significantly outperform the results achieved using
Dispatching rules or Python Mixed-Integer Linear programs. Schworm et al. [26] addressed real-time responsiveness
to disturbances in manufacturing environments using QA for dynamic job shop scheduling and showed an advantage
for large problem sizes. Amaro et al. [3] present a case study applying variational quantum algorithms to job shop
scheduling with notably accelerated convergence. Recent results by Tang et al. [31] show that quantum computing
can deliver dramatic efficiency gains for several automated guided vehicles scheduling models in manufacturing, with
up to 92% time savings. Ren and Liu [24] introduce a dynamic FJSP approach that incorporates machine breakdowns
and new job arrivals, thereby furthering the practicality of quantum-inspired scheduling.
7Flow shop scheduling is a special case of job shop scheduling in which all jobs have identical operation flow patterns on
machines [1].
5

=== PAGE BREAK ===

APREPRINT- JANUARY15, 2026
DFJSP.Only few papers focus on the FJSP with transportation time between jobs, also known as DFJSP. Marzouki
et al. [17] developed a novel mathematical model for the distributed DFJSP that explicitly incorporates transportation
time between machines, and proposed an effective optimization framework that significantly reduces makespan and
enhances coordination across distributed manufacturing environments. Peng et al. [23] formulated a multi-objective
dynamic DFJSP that explicitly accounts for uncertain processing times, proposing a novel optimization framework
that improves schedule robustness and adaptability in distributed manufacturing environments under real-world un-
certainty. Yuan et al. [37] proposed an improved deep Q network approach for the distributed heterogeneous FJSP
that integrates automated guided vehicle (AGV) transportation, demonstrating substantial optimization of production
makespan and resource utilization. Zhang et al. [39] develop a modified Genetic Algorithm (GA) to solve the FJSP
with transportation time. Marzouki et al. [16] use a Chemical Reaction Optimization Metaheuristic to solve the DFJSP.
Liu et al. [14] propose a refined GA and apply it with satisfactory results on a real case of a manufacturing company.
Generally, most of the papers focus on studying the JSSP. Although some research includes transportation time in the
model, these studies typically employ classical approaches, such as heuristics or GA. In this research, an extended
case of DFJSP is studied, where not only jobs (production orders), but also job operations (production steps) can be
distributed. For this purpose, a D-Wave Quantum Annealer is used to solve the DFJSP with distributed operations.
The availability of a set of machines capable of processing the same operation and the geographical distribution of
these machines add complexity and pose a significant challenge to solve this combinatorial optimization problem.
4 Modell
In this Section, we describe the QUBO model for solving the extended DFJSP as required by the wool textile industry.
To this end, the extended problem is first formally described in Subsection 4.1. Based on this, we create the QUBO
model in Subsection 4.2, reduce the number of its variables in Subsection 4.3, and deal with the determination of the
Lagrange parameters in Subsection 4.4.
4.1 Problem formulation
The DFJSP refers to job scheduling in distributed manufacturing environments. There could be different objectives
when solving the DFJSP (e.g., minimizing job completion time, processing costs, or energy consumption). This paper
focuses on finding the optimal schedule that minimizes the time required to complete the jobs, i.e., themakespan. The
formulation used is the one introduced by Venturelli et al. [33] for the JSSP and the extension from Schworm et al. [25]
for the FJSP. In this research, the model is extended to include shipping time for distributed operations. It is assumed
that there are A jobsJ ={j 1, ..., jA}to be processed on B machinesM ={m 1, ..., mB}in C factoriesF ={f 1, ..., fC}.
Each jobi∈Jconsists of a set of L operationsO i ={o 1, ..., oL}. Any operationo∈O i can be processed on at least
one machine out of the given setM i,o. For any job, the order of operationso∈O i is given byR Oi ={r o1, ..., rol}, in
whichr l is the last operation of jobi. Another notations used in this paper are listed in Tbl. 1.
Notation Description
o′ Next operation of any operationo∈O i.
m′ Machine of next operationo′∈O i.
tTime step in a given timelineT ={0, ..., t max}, wheret max is the completion
time of all jobs.
t′ Next time step of any time stept∈T.
ti,o,m Starting time of operationoof jobion machinem.
pi,o,m Processing time of operationoof jobion machinem.
dm,m′ Shipping time between machines.
kf,f ′ Shipping time between factories.
Pi,o Minimum predecessor time of operationo.
Si,o Minimum successor time of operationo.
Table 1: List of notations used in this paper.
Reminder: The production orders are referred to as jobs and the production steps as operations in the context of the
DFJSP. Since machines are associated with factories, the distance between machines is derived from the distance
between factories. Distance between factoriesk f,f ′ is directly related to the shipping timed m,m′ needed to send the
lots in production to another location. In this paper, ’distance’ and ’shipping time’ are used interchangeably and refer
6

=== PAGE BREAK ===

APREPRINT- JANUARY15, 2026
to the value added to the cost function when production lots are shipped between locations. Fig. 2 shows a schema
representing the DFJSP.
Figure 2: Presentation of the DFJSP consisting ofAJobs,LOperations (per Job),BMachines andCFactories (Source:
authors).
Different jobs may have varying numbers of operations, each with its own processing time on a specific machine.
This paper focuses on a special case of DFJSP where operations of the same job can be performed on machines in
geographically distributed factories, which means that the distance between machines should be considered when
generating the job schedule.
In the DFJSP the following constraints are considered:
1. Precedence of operations - an operation can only start when the previous operation has finished.
2. Operation starts once - operation processing on machines cannot be interrupted (the reason ,behind this
condition is that each machine must be technically adjusted for every new production lot, which is time-
consuming).
3. No-overlap - each machine can only process one operation at a time.
Other underlying assumptions of the DFJSP are that operations of a job must be performed in the correct order to
complete that job. The operations of different jobs are not subject to any precedence constraints and can be processed
in parallel. Each factory is equipped with machines of various types, resulting in different potential processing times
for an operation. A job can be scheduled on a machine multiple times. All machines are available for use and all jobs
can be processed starting with time zero [39].
4.2 QUBO model
Samplers are processes used to solve problems with D-Wave. A BQM sampler samples low-energy states in the model
defined by the QUBO equation and returns a list of samples to increase energy. The QUBO model is composed of
binary variablesx i,o,m,t, each representing one operation per unit of time on a machine, up to the makespan:
xi,o,m,t =
 1 :operationoof jobistarts on machinemat timet
0 :otherwise (4)
This variable determines whether an operationoof a jobistarts on a machinemat timetor not. Timetgoes from time
0tot max in integer steps, wheret max is the sum of the execution times of all operations and the shipping time between
machines.
The objective functionH(x)is defined as a cost function (Eq. 5), which minimizes the time taken to complete all
operations (the makespan). Cost functions are mathematical expressions of optimization problems. For quantum com-
puting, cost functions are quadratic models that have the lowest values (energy) for good solutions to the problems
they represent. Each point on a cost function represents a different solution configuration - in this case, each config-
uration is a particular assignment of the starting times of operations. The goal of the optimization is to minimize the
cost of the solution, i.e., the amount of time needed to complete all operations. The mathematical representation of the
penalty terms and the makespan objective are added and build the cost function of the DFJSP with the format:
7

=== PAGE BREAK ===

APREPRINT- JANUARY15, 2026
H(x) =α∗f(x) +β∗g(x) +γ∗h(x) +k(x)(5)
where:
f(x),g(x), andh(x)represent penalty functions for precedence, operation once, and no-overlap constraints, respec-
tively,
k(x)represents the objective function, which will minimize the makespan,
α,β,γare the Lagrange parameters that emphasize different weights assigned to penalties.
Every time a solution violates one or more constraints, a penalty is applied to that solution (e.g., two operations on a
single machine that are scheduled to run at the same time violate the no-overlap constraint, which means that a penalty
will be assigned). Positive terms penalize certain solution configurations, while negative ones support them. By adding
penalties to terms that break the constraints, the cost of those configurations increases. This reduces the likelihood
of generating a suboptimal solution. The importance attributed to each term can be adjusted using the weightsα,β,
andγ. The process of adjusting these weights is explained in Section 4.4. The weights determine the importance of
penalty functions in relation to other terms.
Precedence constraint.The precedence constraint states that a job operation can only start after the previous operation
is finished and the lot arrived at the production site of the next operation, if shipping is necessary.
To formulate the penalty, cases where consecutive operationsoando ′ in a job take place out of order are counted. If
the starting time ofo ′ denoted byt′
i,o’,m’ is less than the sum of the starting time ofodenoted byt i,o,m, its processing
timep i,o,m and the shipping time between machinesd m,m′ , then this counts as penalty. The penalty condition can be
formulated as follows:
t′
i,o′,m′−t i,o,m <p i,o,m +d m,m′ (6)
This penalty is the sum of all operations of a jobifor all the jobs:
f(x) =
X
i∈J
X
o,o′∈Oi
ro < r o′
X
t′
i,o′ ,m′−ti,o,m < p i,o,m+dm,m′
m,m′∈Mi,o×Mi,o′
xi,o,m,t·x i,o′,m′,t′
(7)
where:
P
i∈J :sum over all jobs,
P
o,o′∈Oi :sum over all combinations of sequential operations,
t′
i,o′,m′−t i,o,m <p i,o,m +d m,m′ :penalty condition,
xi,o,m,t·x i,o′,m′,t′ :represents the expression that assigns a penalty every time the precedence constraint is violated.
Operation-once constraint.To represent this mathematically, the following function is formulated, which sums
values across all possible time stepst:
g(x) =
X
i∈J
X
o∈Oi

 X
ti,o∈T
X
m∈Mi,o
xi,o,m,t−1


2
(8)
where:
P
i∈J :sum over all jobs,
8

=== PAGE BREAK ===

APREPRINT- JANUARY15, 2026
P
o∈Oi :sum over all operations,
P
ti,o∈T
P
m∈Mi,o :sum over all time steps on all machines,
xi,o,m,t :represents the expression that assigns a penalty every time the precedence constraint is violated,
P(...)2 :squares the results in parentheses to keep the penalty term positive in case an operation is not scheduled.
No-overlap constraint.The penalty function is the sum of pairwise products of binary variablesx i,o,m,t andx i′,o′,m,t′
that represent starting time of operations on each machine, which must be equal to zero for the configuration to be
valid:
h(x) =
X
m∈Mi,o∩Mi′ ,o′
X
i,i′∈J
X
o,o′∈Oi×O′
i
i,i′,t,t′∈Am∪Bm
xi,o,m,t·x i′,o′,m,t′ (9)
The setsA m andB m are defined as follows:
Am ={(i,i ′,t,t′) :i,i ′∈J,i̸=i ′,t,t′∈T,0<t ′−t<p i,o,m}
Bm ={(i,i ′,t,t′) :i,i ′∈J,i̸=i ′,t=t ′,p i,o,m >0,p i′,o′,m >0}
The setA m is a condition that forbids operationo ′ to start at timet′ if the processing of the previous operationohas
not finished yet (meaning thatt ′−t<p i,o,m). The setB m forbids the operations to start at the same time. Further
details on the penalty functionh(x)are:
P
m∈Mi,o∩Mi′,o′ :sum of each independent machine,
P
i,i′∈J :sum over jobs,
P
o,o′∈Oi×O′
i
:sum over operations,
xi,o,m,t·x i′,o′,m,t′ :product of binary variables, that assigns a penalty every time the no-overlap constraint is violated.
Makespan Function.To formulate the optimization objective of completing each job in the shortest time possible,
the following polynomial function is defined, which penalizes the late completion time of operations:
k(x) =
X
o∈Oi
m∈Mi,o
xi,o,m,t·(t i,o,m +p i,o,m−P i,o)
(10)
where:
Pi,o =
X
r′
o < r o
m′∈Mi,o′
min(pi,o′,m′ +d m,m′)
Pi,o is the minimum predecessor time of the operationo, which is the sum of the minimum processing times of the
preceding operations and shipping distances between them.
4.3 Variable pruning
In the previous Section, the binary variablexi,o,m,t was defined to represent whether an operationoof a jobiis scheduled
to start on a machinemat timetor not. To reduce the number of variables in the model, a method called variable
pruning is used, which removes variables that are not possible in valid solutions. First, an upper boundt max of the
highest possible makespan is calculated. Without this step, the solver will have to consider all solutions between zero
and infinity, which implies a very large solution space that makes it difficult to embed and solve the QUBO [33].
Instead, the search space is limited by defining the upper bound of a schedule as the sum of the maximum processing
time of each operation in all jobs and the maximum shipping time between these operations. Thus, a significant
number of variablesx i,o,m,t can be pruned by applying restrictions on timet.
9

=== PAGE BREAK ===

APREPRINT- JANUARY15, 2026
Next, the duration and order of operations within a job are examined. Variables that prevent an operation from execut-
ing at a given time, resulting in an invalid schedule, are removed. Specifically, variables are pruned to allow operations
to start earlier than the sum of the processing time of its predecessors, or if they allow operations to begin later than
the sum of its own processing time and that of the successor operations subtracted fromt max [40].
To set a lower bound of operations in a job, the notion of minimum predecessor timeP i,o of an operation is used:
Pi,o =
X
r′
o < r o
m′∈Mi,o′
min(pi,o′,m′ +d m,m′)
Pi,o is the minimum predecessor time of the operationo, calculated as the sum of the minimum processing time of the
preceding operations and shipping distance between them. A starting time earlier than the minimum predecessor time
is invalid; therefore, these binary variables can be eliminated from the model [25].
Additionally, an upper bound for the starting timetof operations can be set. This corresponds to the maximum
makespant max minus the sum of the processing time of the operation and that of all subsequent operations and shipping
time between machinesS i,o:
tmax−p i,o,m−S i,o (11)
where:
Si,o =
X
r′
o≥r o
m,m′∈Mi,o′
min(pi,o′
i,m′ +d m,m′)
These variables can also be eliminated from the QUBO, since they represent invalid starting times [33]. Thus, the
starting time of operationsoshould be in the range|P i,o,t max−S i,o|, all the other variables that are not in this range
are removed from the model to decrease the size of the computational problem and computation time [40].
To further reduce the number of binary variables, the starting times of simultaneous operations on machines are also
removed [7].
4.4 Lagrange parameters
In the previous sections, the constraints have been formulated as binary polynomials in a Hamilton formulation. The
binary polynomialsf(x),g(x),h(x)are multiplied with non-negative scalar weightsα,β,γalso known as Lagrange
parameters (Eq. 5), which determine the impact of the respective polynomial [25]. Weights are assigned to each
constraint depending on the relative strengths of the objective function and the constraints. The weights must be set
high enough so that a valid solution with no broken constraints is returned. On the other hand, values that are too high
will result in solutions that are valid, but far from optimal8.
To find the Lagrange parameterβfor the operation-once constraint, the case ofH(x)is investigated that consists of the
constraintg(x)and the makespan objective function:
H(x) =β∗


X
i∈J
X
o∈Oi

 X
ti,o∈T
X
m∈Mi,o
xi,o,m,t−1


2

+
X
o∈Oi
m∈Mi,o
xi,o,m,t·(t i,o,m +p i,o,m−P i,o)
(12)
For example, for jobj 1 in Tbl. 2, operationo 1 is starting on machinem 1 at timet 0 and has a processing timep 1,1,1 = 1
(this technique is applied in the same way for larger problem instances with more jobs and operations).
8Problem Formulation Guide [White Paper]:https://www.dwavesys.com/media/bu0lh5ee/
problem-formulation-guide-2022-01-10.pdf
10

=== PAGE BREAK ===

APREPRINT- JANUARY15, 2026
Thus, the sum of processing times of previous operationsP1,2 ofo 2 is equal to 1. Further,o 2 of the same job is starting
at different timeston machinem 3. Shipping time between machinesd 1,3 equals to zero. Both binary variablesx 1,1,1,0
andx 1,2,3,1 are equal to 1. This can be expressed by a QUBO. Forβ= 1, the value and thus, the energy of cost function
H(x)equals to 3:
=β·((x 1,1,1,0−1) 2 + (x1,2,3,1−1) 2) + (x1,1,1,0 + 2·x 1,2,3,1)
= 1·((1−1) 2 + (1−1) 2) + (1 + 2·1) = 3
This is the sum of the processing times of the two operationso 1 ando 2 that represent the makespan objective function
(second term in equationH(x)). Since the start-once constraint is not violated, the first term in equationH(x)is equal
to zero. This is also the minimum energy level of a valid solution for this specific problem instance. Any violation of
the constraints will add penalties to the cost function that will increase the energy of the system.
A specific case, however, should be considered. Let us assume that operationo 2 is not scheduled to start at all. This
will result in a cost functionH(x)that equals to 2:
H(x) = 1·((1−1) 2 + (0−1) 2) + (1 + 0) = 2
Although the returned solution is invalid, the energy of the system equals2in this case, which is less than the minimum
valid energy of3. Tbl. 2 summarizes the results for functionH(x)forβ= 1.
tx 1,1,1,t x1,2,3,1 x1,2,3,t
0 1 0 0
1 0 1 0
2 0 0 0
3 0 0 0
H(x)- 3 2
Table 2: Lagrange parameters in cost function.
To compensate for this effect, a Lagrange parameter is applied that increases the weight of the penalty term. In DFJSP,
valid solutions with higher energy are preferred to invalid solutions with low energy but violated constraints. The value
of the weight parameter depends on the problem instance. A value that is too low penalizes invalid configurations of
variables insufficiently, resulting in energy values that might be lower than the minimum energy of the best valid
solution. Values that are too high would return valid configurations – possible with higher energy than the optimum.
The value of the Lagrange parameter is set based on the maximum makespan of the jobs (t max in Section 4.3). The
maximum energy value, which corresponds to the maximum makespant max, is equal to 10 (this value is calculated
for each problem instance based on the input job dictionary). The penalty is set toβ=t max, meaning the maximum
energy possible for a valid configuration for this problem instance, which results in the following functionH(x):
H(x) = (1 + 0) + 10·((1−1) 2 + (0−1) 2) = 11
The energy of the function is equal to11, which is above the maximum energy possible for valid solutions of10. This
ensures that no invalid solution will have lower energy than any of the valid solutions. The technique demonstrated in
this simplified example can be applied similarly to problems with more jobs and operations. The resulting QUBO will
have more variables.
The same method is used to calculate the weights for other constraints as well. Generally, the Lagrange parameters
are set individually for each constraint, depending on the magnitude of the objective function to be minimized and its
relative strength to the constraints. In this case, to make sure that the cost functionH(x)has the lowest energy for valid
solutions, the weightsα,β,γof penalty functionsf(x),g(x)andf(x)are all set equal tot max, which is the maximum
energy value of all valid solutions.
5 Experiments
In this Section, we implement the model and conduct experiments on a D-Wave quantum annealer (specifically, the
Advantage System 4.1). As is common practice, the results of the experiment on a quantum annealer are compared
11

=== PAGE BREAK ===

APREPRINT- JANUARY15, 2026
with those obtained from SA. Firstly, the problem size (see 5.1) and solver parameters (see 5.2) are defined. The
QUBO model is constructed using the PyQUBO Python library, which provides a high-level interface for formulating
combinatorial optimization problems in QUBO form and supports solving them using various solvers, including the
D-Wave quantum annealer [38]. We then present the results of the experiments in Subchapter 5.3 and discuss them in
Subchapter 5.4.
5.1 Problem size and dataset
To analyze the performance of the D-Wave quantum annealer for the DFJSP, 6 problem instances are defined in such
a way that the size of the smallest problem instance is 50 and the size of the largest one is 250. The instances in
between are defined in even intervals of 50 (e.g., 100, 150, etc 9). The size of the problem instances refers to the
number of binary variablesx i,o,m,t necessary to represent the problem in QUBO form. The maximum size of the
problem instances is dictated by the physical properties of the D-Wave QPU. The D-WaveAdvantage System 4.1has
5627 qubits. However, not all qubits are interconnected. When embedding the model variables onto the physical
hardware graph of the QPU, in some cases, to represent a single logical variable set of physical qubits calledchains
are necessary, with couplings between physical qubits capable of realizing the correct interaction between logical
variables [36]. This leads to embedding patterns that need more physical qubits than there are variables in the original
problem.
The purpose of the experiment is to test the capacity and performance of the D-Wave quantum annealer for the DFJSP
up to the largest problem that can be embedded into the QPU. Tbl. 3 summarizes the instances solved by QA, the
number of qubits needed to embed the model onto the physical QPU, and the length of the longest chain in the
embedding.
Problem size Number of qubits Max chain
50 223 7
100 977 18
150 2115 25
200 3156 28
250 4067 32
300- -
Table 3: Logical problem variables and number of qubits needed for embedding.
Smaller problem instances require a lower number of qubits for embedding. It is also true that the length of the chains
increases with problem size, meaning that with an increasing number of variables, it becomes more challenging to
find embedding schemas. Therefore, longer chains are required to connect the variables through couplers. In this
model, the largest problem instance that could be embedded was of size 250, which required more than 4000 qubits
for embedding. For 300 variables, no embedding could be found.
The problem instances are formulated for 2 jobs,j 1 andj 2, each job containing a minimum of 2 operations. Each
operation can be processed on one machine or a set of two machines, with different processing times on each machine.
To include shipping distance in the model, the sets of machines available for each operation include machines from
different factories. The consideration of the shipping distance is essential for the processing ofContribution 1. The
number of operations in each job, the available machines, and the processing time on each machine determine the
number of binary variablesx i,o,m,t necessary to represent the problem in QUBO form.
5.2 Solver parameters
There are numerous solver parameters10 that can be adjusted when submitting problems to solvers. In this experiment,
the default settings are kept for most of them, including the default annealing time of 20µs. The parameters that are
adjusted in the experiment are the number of reads and the chain strength.
Number of reads.In theory, very long annealing times should keep the system in a low energy state, in practice,
noise due to hardware imperfections will push the state to a higher energy [5]. Therefore, short annealing times are
preferred in order to take many samples from the energy distribution of the problem. The appropriate number of
9Problem size is rounded for some instances (e.g. instance size 99 is rounded to 100).
10https://docs.dwavequantum.com/en/latest/industrial_optimization/index_properties_parameters.
html
12

=== PAGE BREAK ===

APREPRINT- JANUARY15, 2026
samples depends on the problem itself and its energy distribution, and is usually between 10 and 10,000 samples [5].
In this experiment, the number of reads (’num reads’) is set to 1000. Generally, increasing the number of reads can
increase the probability of obtaining better solutions, but improvements diminish due to some problem-dependent
factors. For this model, increasing the number of reads significantly above 1000 does not appear to be advantageous.
Sampling the problem instance with 200 variables 3000 times produced a solution with an energy of 34 and 2 violated
constraints, which is worse than the energy of the best solution of 24 and 1 violated constraint obtained with 1000
reads. This is consistent with the results obtained by Carugno et al. [5], who found that increasing the number of reads
from 1000 to 10000 did not have any beneficial effects.
Figure 3: Chain break analysis for problem instance of size 150 (Source: authors).
Chain strength.For a solution to be consistent, the chain of qubits has to act as a single qubit, meaning that all the
qubits in the chain must have the same values after annealing [5]. Broken chains show different values of the qubits
at the end of the annealing process. Chains must be set strong enough to ensure that the qubits of the chain show the
same value compared to other qubits. If the chain’s strength is too small, then the qubits will show different values. If
the chain strength parameter is too high, it will impede the qubits in the chain from changing their state, causing the
chain to behave like a separate entity that does not interact with other terms of the function.
We follow the D-Wave recommendation11 to determine the chain strength for each problem instance and start with
two utility functions to estimate the chain strength:
1.scaled
2.uniform torque compensation
The first function returns a chain strength that is scaled to the problem bias range. The second function calculates
a chain strength that attempts to compensate for the torque that would break the chain. Both methods should be
viewed as a starting point for estimating the optimal chain strength, rather than a rule, since this parameter is problem-
dependent. In the next step, the chain strength parameter found in step 1 should be doubled or tripled to check if this
change has an impact on the percentage of broken chains.
To find the best chain strength for the model, the model is run on the QPU for each problem instance, and the resulting
energy and the percentage of broken chains in the best solution are analyzed. The intention is to find the lowest energy
possible, while also having a low rate of broken chains to ensure a consistent solution. Fig. 3 shows the results of the
measurements for the problem instance of size 150.
The utility functionscaledreturns a chain strength of 32 with an energy of 69; the functionuniform torquereturns
a value of 309 with an energy of 966. To understand the relationship between these parameters, the range between
11https://docs.dwavequantum.com/en/latest/quantum_research/embedding_guidance.html
13

=== PAGE BREAK ===

APREPRINT- JANUARY15, 2026
these two chain strengths is divided into 11 intervals, and the energy and the percentage of broken chains in the best
solutions for each of these points are measured. Additionally, the smallest chain strength value is divided by 2 to
check whether a smaller parameter could improve the results. The results in the graph show that the lowest energy
achieved corresponds to the next point in the interval from the point obtained with thescaledfunction. However, the
percentage of broken chains corresponding to this value is 41%, which is high compared to values in the graph for
higher chain strength values. To determine whether to accept a chain strength parameter of 39, an additional analysis
of the solution’s consistency is necessary. Fig. 4 shows that, despite a higher number of broken chains, the embedding
with a chain strength of 39 delivers a consistent solution without broken constraints. As the chain strength parameter
increases, the number of broken constraints also increases.
Figure 4: Chain strength impact on solution quality (Source: authors).
This procedure is repeated in the experiment for all problem instances to calculate the appropriate parameter for the
chain strength. For all instances, the parameter that delivered the best solution with the lowest energy is one interval
above the parameter estimated by thescaledfunction. Since the intention is to test the extent to which the QPU can
handle large problems, this method is applied to problem instances of sizes 250 and 300. For problems of size 50 to
150, the solver can find consistent solutions with no broken constraints. For problem instances of size 200 and 250,
the solutions with the lowest energy found had 1 and 2 broken constraints, respectively. For the instance of size 300,
no embedding could be found.
SA parameters.To solve problems with SA, the D-Wave Sampler classSimulatedAnnealingSamplerof the D-Wave
Ocean SDK is used. The sampler utilizes a classical heuristic SA algorithm that runs locally on the CPU 12. For SA,
the Central Processing Unit (CPU) time is measured, which is the amount of time that the CPU has spent solving the
problem. The CPU time is compared to QPU access time.
To compare QA and SA, the number of iterations needed and the ability to find a consistent solution are analyzed. To
have comparable results, the number of reads for SA is set to 1000, like the parameter for QA. The parameter number
of sweeps (num sweeps) is set to 3, which is the smallest value for this parameter that returned solutions with no
broken constraints. As with QA, the SA algorithm is run for all the instances of the problem to determine whether the
system is able to find valid solutions. Additionally, problem instances of size 350 and 400 are included in the analysis.
5.3 Numerical Results
To provide theContributions 2 and 3formulated in Section 1, the results obtained from the experiment are analyzed
from both a qualitative and a quantitative perspective. The first answers the question of how good the returned solution
12Hardware configuration: 2x Intel Xeon Gold 6326 CPU 16Core, 2.9GHz 24M 185W Socket 4189, 4 x Samsung 64GB DDR4
ECC RDIMM 3200Mhz total 256GB RAM, 4 x HDD WD Gold Datacenter 1TB SATA, 1x SSD Samsung PM883 480GB SATA,
2 x 1 / 10 GB Ethernet 10 BaseT RJ-45 onboard.
14

=== PAGE BREAK ===

APREPRINT- JANUARY15, 2026
is in terms of system energy and makespan. The second compares QPU access time and CPU time of SA to assess
whether there is a speed advantage in using the quantum annealer to solve the DFJSP with distributed operations. The
hardware characteristics influence the results; different hardware may yield different results.
System energy and makespan.The goal of the experiment is to find consistent solutions in the shortest time possible.
When sampling from QA or SA, the returned sample set contains 1000 samples, in accordance with the defined number
of reads. The sample with the lowest energy in the sample set is selected as the best sample result for the respective
problem instance. This is not always the solution corresponding to the global minimum, which is represented by
the lowest energy possible for the QUBO. For this use case, however, finding the global minimum is not crucial.
A solution is satisfactory if it is consistent and represents a valid schedule plan that can be obtained in a reasonable
amount of time. Further optimization steps can then be implemented to minimize the energy of the system and the
makespan. Fig. 5 shows a comparison of best solution energies found with QA and SA for instances of different sizes.
Figure 5: Energy of best solutions obtained with QA and SA (Source: authors).
For the smallest problem instance, both QA and SA found a low energy of 2 and returned valid solutions. For in-
stances of size 100 and 150, both methods delivered consistent solutions, but SA performed better in terms of energy.
For problem instances of size 200 and 250, the best solution returned by the quantum annealer had 1 and 2 broken
constraints, respectively. This explains the increasing energy values for these problems. This observation is related to
the percentage of broken chains, which increases with problem size and deteriorates solution quality as the number of
variables in the problem grows. These results are consistent with results found in other papers. Carugno et al. [5] found
that for JSSP instances with an unknown optimal solution, QA is not able to find the best solution that corresponds to
the global minimum.
To calculate the makespan in themakespan function(Eq. 10), the minimum ending time and the maximum ending
time of all operations are used. These terms represent the minimum and the maximum makespans possible and are
the lower and the upper bound of the makespan range, respectively. In terms of makespan, QA returns solutions in
the lower half of the possible makespan range for all problem sizes, except for size 250, which is in the upper half of
possible solutions (Fig. 6).
To summarize, QA can find consistent solutions for problem instances up to 150 variables. For the instance of size
200, the makespan found is still in the first half of solutions, but 1 constraint is violated. For size 250, the makespan
is slightly below the maximum possible value, and 2 constraints are violated. Current QA technology is subject to
hardware and software limitations; however, with the growing number of qubits and increasing connectivity between
them, problems with a higher number of variables can potentially be embedded into future QPUs. Additionally,
improving QPU stability promises to deliver solutions of better quality and with lower energy of the system.
Next, QPU access time and CPU time of SA for the DFJSP with distributed operations are compared.
15

=== PAGE BREAK ===

APREPRINT- JANUARY15, 2026
Figure 6: Comparison of Makespan values obtained by QA and SA (Source: authors).
Calculation time.To determine the QPU access time, the instances from size 50 to 250 are solved with the quantum
annealer. Based on these results, a trendline is derived for instances of size 300 to 400. In this case, since the rate
of change in the data decreases and levels off, a logarithmic trendline best describes the data. The R-squared value
of 0.9767 is a strong indicator that the logarithmic trendline accurately represents the data. With SA, it was possible
to solve problem instances of all sizes, up to the 400-variable problem instance. Fig. 7 shows the results that were
obtained by both methods.
Figure 7: Calculation time with QA and SA (Source: authors).
Although SA performs better for small problem sizes, the CPU calculation time of SA increases exponentially with
the increasing problem size. On the other hand, due to hardware limitations, theAdvantage System 4.1quantum
annealer is capable of embedding problems up to a maximum size of 250 variables. However, its advantage is that
16

=== PAGE BREAK ===

APREPRINT- JANUARY15, 2026
the calculation time increases at a decreasing rate with problem size. For business problems with a very large number
of variables, specific to the DFJSP, a calculation time that scales logarithmically with problem size is a significant
benefit, compared to the exponential growth of CPU time.
5.4 Discussion
In this paper, a step-by-step practical implementation of the DFJSP with distributed operations and its evaluation using
D-Wave quantum annealer, based on a real use case from the wool textile industry, is presented. First, the problem is
described mathematically as a constraint satisfaction problem. Then, the process of reformulating the mathematical
problem in QUBO format is discussed in detail, as well as its embedding into the D-Wave quantum annealer QPU
and the configuration of QPU solver parameters. Finally, solutions are sampled from the QPU to find low-energy
states of the cost function. While formulating the QUBO, particular attention is dedicated to the calculation of the
appropriate Lagrange parameters (Subsection 4.4), which increase the weights of the penalty terms. Another aspect
that is carefully investigated while configuring the experiment is the chain strength parameter (Subsection 5.2). Both
aspects make upContribution 2.
Another aim of the paper was to investigate whether QA can provide a speed advantage for the DFJSP with operations
specific to the wool textile industry. To answer this question, both qualitative and quantitative analyses are conducted.
Current QA technology enables the use of more qubits than classical gate model quantum computers. However, there
are still limitations imposed by hardware and software imperfections. With this in mind, the test challenged to the limit
the ability of QA to deliver consistent solutions for large problem instances in the shortest time possible. To conduct
the experiment, problem instances with sizes ranging from 50 to 250 are solved in increments of 50 variables using
QA and SA. Additionally, problems with up to 400 variables are solved only with SA to increase the size range and
determine the calculation time trend. The missing data for QA is extrapolated as a logarithmic trendline.
The qualitative analysis of the solutions returned indicates that for problem instances with up to 150 variables, both
QA and SA, with technical characteristics as used in this research, deliver consistent solutions, and thus valid pro-
duction schedules. However, SA performs slightly better in terms of returned energy. With an increasing number
of variables, hardware imperfections become more visible, manifesting as a higher number of broken chains in the
returned solutions, and consequently, in solutions with higher energy due to broken constraints. For the problem of
size 200, the best solution returned by QA has 1 broken constraint; for the instance of 250 variables, 2 constraints
were violated. Due to a higher usage of physical qubits needed compared to the number of variables in the original
QUBO, the maximum problem instance that could be embedded onto the QPU was of 250 variables. For the problem
of size 300, no embedding could be found. In terms of makespan, QA finds solutions for almost all problem sizes in
the lower half of the possible makespan range, except for size 250, which is in the upper half of the possible solutions.
The makespan determined by SA is comparable, although for a few problem instances SA can find solutions that are
closer to the global minimum. All solutions calculated by SA are consistent, even for the largest instances in the test.
To tackle theContribution 3, QPU access time and SA CPU time necessary to calculate the solutions to the problems
were measured. The results reveal that QA requires more time than SA for smaller problem instances, but the time
needed increases at a decreasing rate as the problem size grows. This is not the case for SA, whose CPU time grows
exponentially with the increasing number of variables. The CPU timeline and the trendline of the CPU access time are
slightly above the value of 300 variables. If this trend persists with the new QA hardware generation that is to come,
every problem with a size larger than this value could be solved faster than with SA. Thus, the question of the speed
advantage can be answered positively: QA can potentially result in a speed advantage for the DFJSP with distributed
operations.
Even if the QA technology currently faces limitations, the new generation of quantum annealers with improved hard-
ware promises to accelerate the solution of complex combinatorial optimization problems, such as the DFJSP. The
measurements show that, given the same experimental parameters and improved hardware, QA can provide a speed-up
advantage over SA starting with problem instances that are slightly larger than 300 variables. To test this assumption,
new tests must be performed for larger problem instances, for which only the trend could be extrapolated at the mo-
ment, as soon as the latest generation of quantum annealers becomes available. More qubits and connections between
them, as well as more stable systems, will enable the embedding of larger problems and the discovery of energies
closer to the global minimum. Additionally, research on tuning and configuration of QA parameters is another neces-
sity that will enable us to minimize energy and find the optimal solution. Determining the strength of the qubit chains
is a laborious task that is not only model-dependent but also instance-dependent and has a significant impact on the
quality of the obtained solutions.
17

=== PAGE BREAK ===

APREPRINT- JANUARY15, 2026
6 Conclusion
Many modern manufacturing enterprises have evolved from a single to a multi-factory production environment, as is
the case with big production companies in the wool textile industry. Planning systems changed from classical JSSP to
DFJSP, with companies facing the challenge of increased frequency and complexity of production planning. Classical
heuristics deliver valid results on small problem instances but are unable to find solutions for problem sizes relevant
to practice. Therefore, methods are required that yield high-quality outcomes while ensuring reasonable computation
times. In this paper, the concept of QA-based optimization for the DFJSP with geographically distributed operations
is investigated to answer the question of whether QA can provide a speed advantage for the DFJSP with distributed
operations specific to the wool textile industry.
To do this, we show a step-by-step implementation of the workflow for solving the DFJSP with QA (Contribution
1). Special attention is devoted to topics that do not have a straightforward approach but a significant impact on the
solution quality, such as calculating the Lagrange parameters or determining the chain strength. The results show that
up to a certain problem size, QA delivers consistent solutions that are not the global minimum solution in the solution
space but yield a makespan in the first half of the allowed valid solutions (Contribution 2). For all instances, SA
delivers comparable or slightly better results, which are consistent with other research. In terms of calculation time,
QA needs more QPU time to find solutions for smaller problem instances in the test, but QPU access time increases at a
declining rate with the growing problem size. In contrast, the SA CPU time develops exponentially for problems with
a larger number of variables. The results of the experiment show that, starting with a certain problem size, QA could
potentially offer a speed-up advantage, given that expected improvements in hardware and software are anticipated
(Contribution 3).
One of the future tasks is to solve larger problems on the next generation of quantum annealers to confirm the results
obtained in this experiment. Other topics open for future research are QPU parameter tuning and configuration. There
is also a need for additional research on embedding techniques that can minimize the length of the chains and enable
the embedding of more QUBO variables into physical qubits, thereby solving problems of greater size.
References
[1] A. Baskar and M. A. Xavior. A Simple Model to Optimize General Flow-Shop Scheduling Problems With
Known Break Down Time And Weights Of Jobs.Procedia Engineering, 38:191–196, 2012. ISSN 1877-7058.
URLhttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2012.06.026.
[2] A. Sharma and P. Maharjan. Quantum Annealing as an Optimized Simulated Annealing: A Case Study, 2018.
URLhttps://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.33538.53448.
[3] David Amaro, Matthias Rosenkranz, Nathan Fitzpatrick, Koji Hirano, and Mattia Fiorentini. A case study of
variational quantum algorithms for a job shop scheduling problem.Technol., 9:5, 2022. URLhttps://doi.
org/10.1140/epjqt/s40507-022-00123-4.
[4] Michael Brooks. Beyond quantum supremacy: the hunt for useful quantum computers.Nature, 574(7776):
19–21, 2019. ISSN 1476-4687. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-019-02936-3.
[5] Costantino Carugno, Maurizio Ferrari Dacrema, and Paolo Cremonesi. Evaluating the job shop scheduling
problem on a D-wave quantum annealer.Scientific Reports, 12(1), 2022. ISSN 2045-2322. URLhttps:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-10169-0.
[6] Vasil S. Denchev, Sergio Boixo, Sergei V . Isakov, Nan Ding, Ryan Babbush, Vadim Smelyanskiy, John Martinis,
and Hartmut Neven. What is the Computational Value of Finite-Range Tunneling?Phys. Rev. X, 6:031015,
2016. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevX.6.031015.
[7] Berend Denkena, Fritz Schinkel, Jonathan Pirnay, and S ¨oren Wilmsmeier. Quantum algorithms for process
parallel flexible job shop scheduling.CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology, 33:100–114,
2021. ISSN 1755-5817. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirpj.2021.03.006.
[8] Kaihan Fu, Jianjun Liu, Miao Chen, and Huiying Zhang. Solving Flexible Job-Shop Scheduling Problems Based
on Quantum Computing.Entropy, 27(2), 2025. URLhttps://doi.org/10.3390/e27020189.
[9] Fred W. Glover, Gary A. Kochenberger, Rick Hennig, and Yu Du. Quantum bridge analytics I: a tutorial on
formulating and using QUBO models.Ann. Oper. Res., 314(1):141–183, 2022. URLhttps://doi.org/10.
1007/s10479-022-04634-2.
[10] Johann L. Hurink and Sigrid Knust. Tabu search algorithms for job-shop problems with a single transport robot.
Eur. J. Oper. Res., 162(1):99–111, 2005. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2003.10.034.
18

=== PAGE BREAK ===

APREPRINT- JANUARY15, 2026
[11] Shinichi INOUE, Tong QIN, Sho FUJITA, Shingo TAJIMA, and Hayato YOSHIOKA. Practical approach to
flexible job shop scheduling with tool switching constraints using quantum annealing.Journal of Advanced
Mechanical Design, Systems, and Manufacturing, 18(2):JAMDSM0009–JAMDSM0009, 2024. URLhttps:
//doi.org/10.1299/jamdsm.2024jamdsm0009.
[12] Sajad Karimi, Zaniar Ardalan, B. Naderi, and M. Mohammadi. Scheduling flexible job-shops with transportation
times: Mathematical models and a hybrid imperialist competitive algorithm.Applied Mathematical Modelling,
41:667–682, 2017. ISSN 0307-904X. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.2016.09.022.
[13] Mark W. Lewis and Fred W. Glover. Quadratic unconstrained binary optimization problem preprocessing: The-
ory and empirical analysis.Networks, 70(2):79–97, 2017. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1002/net.21751.
[14] Tung-Kuan Liu, Yeh-Peng Chen, and Jyh-Horng Chou. Solving Distributed and Flexible Job-Shop Scheduling
Problems for a Real-World Fastener Manufacturer.IEEE Access, 2:1598–1606, 2014. URLhttps://doi.
org/10.1109/ACCESS.2015.2388486.
[15] Andrew Lucas. Ising formulations of many NP problems.Frontiers in Physics, 2, 2014. ISSN 2296-424X. URL
https://doi.org/10.3389/fphy.2014.00005.
[16] Bilel Marzouki, Olfa Belkahla Driss, and Khaled Gh ´edira. Solving Distributed and Flexible Job shop Schedul-
ing Problem using a Chemical Reaction Optimization metaheuristic. InKnowledge-Based and Intelligent Infor-
mation & Engineering Systems: Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference KES-2018, Belgrade, Ser-
bia, 3-5 September 2018, volume 126 ofProcedia Computer Science, pages 1424–1433. Elsevier, 2018. URL
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2018.08.114.
[17] Bilel Marzouki, Olfa Belkahla Driss, and Khaled Gh ´edira. Modeling and solving the distributed flexible job
shop scheduling problem with transportation time.Knowledge and Information Systems, 2025. URLhttps:
//doi.org/10.1007/s10115-025-02538-8.
[18] S. Mukherjee and B.K. Chakrabarti. Multivariable optimization: Quantum annealing and computation.The
European Physical Journal Special Topics, 224(1):17–24, 2015. ISSN 1951-6401. URLhttps://doi.org/
10.1140/epjst/e2015-02339-y.
[19] B. Naderi, M. Zandieh, A. Khaleghi Ghoshe Balagh, and V . Roshanaei. An improved simulated annealing for
hybrid flowshops with sequence-dependent setup and transportation times to minimize total completion time and
total tardiness.Expert Systems with Applications, 36(6):9625–9633, 2009. ISSN 0957-4174. URLhttps:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2008.09.063.
[20] Bahman Naderi, A. Ahmadi Javid, and Fariborz Jolai. Permutation flowshops with transportation times: Math-
ematical models and solution methods.The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 46:
631–647, 2010. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1007/S00170-009-2122-8.
[21] Houssem Eddine Nouri, Olfa Belkahla Driss, and Khaled Gh ´edira. Solving the flexible job shop problem by
hybrid metaheuristics-based multiagent model.Journal of Industrial Engineering International, 14(1):1–14,
2017. ISSN 2251-712X. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1007/s40092-017-0204-z.
[22] A. I. Pakhomchik, S. Yudin, M. R. Perelshtein, A. Alekseyenko, and S. Yarkoni. Solving workflow scheduling
problems with QUBO modeling, 2022. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2205.04844.
[23] Ningtao Peng, Yu Zheng, Zhikai Xiao, Guiliang Gong, Dan Huang, Xiahui Liu, Kaikai Zhu, and Qiang Luo.
Multi-objective dynamic distributed flexible job shop scheduling problem considering uncertain processing time.
Cluster Computing, 2025. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1007/s10586-024-04803-x.
[24] Fujie Ren and Haibin Liu. Dynamic scheduling for flexible job shop based on machinerank algorithm
and reinforcement learning.Scientific Reports, 14:29741, 2024. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-024-79593-8.
[25] Philipp Schworm, Xiangqian Wu, Moritz Glatt, and Jan C. Aurich. Solving flexible job shop scheduling problems
in manufacturing with quantum annealing.Production Engineering, 17(1):105–115, 2022. ISSN 1863-7353.
URLhttps://doi.org/10.1007/s11740-022-01145-8.
[26] Philipp Schworm, Xiangqian Wu, Moritz Glatt, and Jan C. Aurich. Responsiveness to sudden disturbances in
manufacturing through dynamic job shop scheduling using quantum annealing.Procedia CIRP, 120:511–516,
2023. ISSN 2212-8271. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2023.09.028.
[27] Jia Si, Shuhan Yang, Yunuo Cen, Jiaer Chen, Yingna Huang, Zhaoyang Yao, Dong-Jun Kim, Kaiming Cai, Jerald
Yoo, Xuanyao Fong, and Hyunsoo Yang. Energy-efficient superparamagnetic ising machine and its application
to traveling salesman problems.Nature Communications, 15:3457, 2024. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-024-47818-z.
19

=== PAGE BREAK ===

APREPRINT- JANUARY15, 2026
[28] Tomasz Smierzchalski, Jakub Pawlowski, Artur Przybysz, Lukasz Pawela, Zbigniew Puchala, M ´aty´as Konior-
czyk, Bartlomiej Gardas, Sebastian Deffner, and Krzysztof Domino. Hybrid quantum-classical computation for
automatic guided vehicles scheduling.Scientific Reports, 14:21809, 2024. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-024-72101-y.
[29] El-Ghazali Talbi.Metaheuristics - From Design to Implementation. Wiley, 2009. ISBN 978-0-470-27858-1.
URLhttps://doi.org/10.1002/9780470496916.
[30] Kotaro Tanahashi, Shinichi Takayanagi, Tomomitsu Motohashi, and Shu Tanaka. Application of Ising Machines
and a Software Development for Ising Machines.Journal of the Physical Society of Japan, 88(6):061010, 2019.
URLhttps://doi.org/10.7566/JPSJ.88.061010.
[31] Liang Tang, Chao Yang, Kai Wen, Wei Wu, and Yiyun Guo. Quantum computing for several agv scheduling
models.Scientific Reports, 14:12205, 2024. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-62821-6.
[32] Kasirajan Venkateswaran.Adiabatic Optimization and Quantum Annealing, pages 365–373. Springer
International Publishing, 2021. ISBN 978-3-030-63689-0. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-63689-0_8.
[33] Davide Venturelli, Dominic J. J. Marchand, and Galo Rojo. Quantum Annealing Implementation of Job-Shop
Scheduling, 2016. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1506.08479v2.
[34] Tom ´as Vyskocil and Hristo N. Djidjev. Embedding Equality Constraints of Optimization Problems into a Quan-
tum Annealer.Algorithms, 12(4):77, 2019. URLhttps://doi.org/10.3390/a12040077.
[35] Xinliang Wei, Lei Fan, Yuanxiong Guo, Yanmin Gong, Zhu Han, and Yu Wang. Hybrid quantum–classical
benders’ decomposition for federated learning scheduling in distributed networks.IEEE Transactions on Network
Science and Engineering, 11(6):6038–6051, 2024. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1109/TNSE.2024.3440930.
[36] Sheir Yarkoni, Elena Raponi, Thomas B ¨ack, and Sebastian Schmitt. Quantum annealing for industry applica-
tions: introduction and review.Reports on Progress in Physics, 85(10):104001, 2022. ISSN 1361-6633. URL
https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6633/ac8c54.
[37] Minghai Yuan, Songwei Lu, Liang Zheng, Qi Yu, Fengque Pei, and Wenbin Gu. Distributed heterogeneous
flexible job-shop scheduling problem considering automated guided vehicle transportation via improved deep q
network.Swarm and Evolutionary Computation, 94:101902, 2025. ISSN 2210-6502. URLhttps://doi.org/
10.1016/j.swevo.2025.101902.
[38] Mashiyat Zaman, Kotaro Tanahashi, and Shu Tanaka. PyQUBO: Python Library for Mapping Combinatorial
Optimization Problems to QUBO Form.IEEE Trans. Computers, 71(4):838–850, 2022. URLhttps://doi.
org/10.1109/TC.2021.3063618.
[39] Guo Hui Zhang, Jing He Sun, Xing Liu, Guo Dong Wang, and Yang Yang Yang. Solving flexible job shop
scheduling problems with transportation time based on improved genetic algorithm.Mathematical biosciences
and engineering : MBE, 16(3):1334—1347, 2019. ISSN 1547-1063. URLhttps://doi.org/10.3934/mbe.
2019065.
[40] Michael R. Zielewski, Mulya Agung, Ryusuke Egawa, and Hiroyuki Takizawa. Improving Quantum Annealing
Performance on Embedded Problems.Supercomput. Front. Innov., 7(4):32–48, 2020. URLhttps://doi.org/
10.14529/jsfi200403.
20